1


2


CONTENTS
TABLE
OF 
Shri Narendra Modi’s Letter to the Nation 
01
President’s Note 
03
Sankalp Patra Note 
04
10 Years of Good Governance and Vikas 
05
Modi Ki Guarantee for Garib Parivar Jan 
11
Modi Ki Guarantee for Middle-Class Parivar Jan 
13
Modi ki Guarantee for Nari Shakti 
15
Modi ki Guarantee for Young Citizens 
17
Modi ki Guarantee for Senior Citizens 
20
Modi ki Guarantee for Kisan Samman 
22
Modi ki Guarantee for Fishermen Families 
26
Modi ki Guarantee for Shramik Samman 
28
Modi ki Guarantee for MSME, Small Traders and Vishwakarmas 
30
Modi ki Guarantee for Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas 
32
Modi ki Guarantee for Vishwa Bandhu Bharat 
35
Modi ki Guarantee for Surakshit Bharat 
38
Modi ki Guarantee for Prosperous Bharat 
40
Modi ki Guarantee for Global Manufacturing Hub 
42
Modi ki Guarantee for World-Class Infrastructure 
45
Modi ki Guarantee for Ease of Living in Cities 
50
Modi ki Guarantee for Virasat Bhi, Vikas Bhi 
52
Modi Ki Guarantee for Good Governance 
54
Modi ki Guarantee for Swastha Bharat 
57
Modi ki Guarantee for Quality Education 
59
Modi ki Guarantee for Sports Development 
61
Modi Ki Guarantee for Balanced Regional Development 
63
Modi ki Guarantee for Technology and Innovations 
65
Modi ki Guarantee for Sustainable Bharat 
67


Shri Narendra Modi’s 
Letter to the Nation
Mere Priya Parivarjan,
It has been a decade since you blessed [MASKED] with the responsibility of serving you. The 
fact that you blessed me to be your Pradhan Sevak at an extremely important time in the history of our 
country inspires me to work ever harder. In the last ten years, every moment of our time and every ounce of 
our energy has been dedicated for the people’s welfare.
With your trust and support, the nation has seen a massive transformation over the last ten years. While 
development attained an unprecedented speed and scale, a signiﬁcant transformation has also happened in 
terms of mindset.
Today, our youth are speaking of creating Viksit Bharat by 2047 as a goal that is attainable, as a milestone 
that will certainly be reached. The nation is conﬁdent on its journey of becoming self-reliant (Aatmanirbhar). 
This is a big change from the atmosphere of desperation and frustration that the nation had experienced in 
the decade prior to 2014 due to the corruption, policy paralysis and misrule by the government of those 
times.
We have gone from a nation that was in the ‘Fragile Five’ to a nation that is one of the top 5 economies of 
the world. The most important facet of this progress is that the fruits of development reached everyone, 
especially those who needed it the most. The mantra of Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas, Sabka 
Prayas has guided our actions.
The nation’s growth has been powered by the victory of 25 crore people in the battle against poverty. These 
are people who had suffered decades of deprivation of even basic necessities. Today, not only are they 
beneﬁting from our saturation approach in basic needs like bank accounts, gas connections, toilets, water, 
electricity, etc, but they are also being empowered with new-age facilities like optic ﬁbre connections, digital 
solutions, drones, etc.
The nation’s growth has come from the drastic socio-economic transformation seen in the lives of women, 
farmers, ﬁsherfolks, street vendors, small entrepreneurs, SC, ST and OBC communities. They are being 
directly empowered through the power of technology such as the JAM trinity.
Farmers have been a backbone of our nation’s progress. Whether it is historic MSP hikes, massive rise in 
procurement or making fertilisers available to them inexpensively despite globally high prices, direct income 
support through PM-KISAN, safety net of Fasal Bima, renewed focus on millets, expanded access to local and 
global markets, a number of steps have been taken to empower them. Our Annadatas are also becoming 
Urjadatas due to the PM KUSUM scheme. Empowered by our Beej Se Bazar Tak approach, our farmers have 
done wonders for the country.
The nation’s growth has been fueled by our focus on Vikas and Virasat.
India has been setting new benchmarks in growth of both ecology and economy.
1


The nation’s growth has been fueled by the achievements of our youth who have not only dared to dream 
big but also worked to realise dreams in various domains such as space, sports and start-ups. In the last ten 
years, whether it is education, employment or entrepreneurship, crores of new opportunities have been 
created for our youth.
It is deeply emotional for each [MASKED] karyakarta, including me, to be involved in this 
momentous journey as enablers of every Indian’s aspirations.
During an address from the ramparts of the Red Fort, I had said – Yahi Samay Hai, Sahi Samay Hai. Today, 
many respected voices across the globe are also saying that this is India’s time. In fact, today, India is being 
seen as an important player in the global efforts to create a better future.
Making the best use of this historic time period needs us to be proactive. The proactive nature of our 
approach is such that we have already worked on a plan of the decisions to be taken in the ﬁrst 100 days of 
the new government.
At such a time, when our nation is ready to take off into a new phase of exponential growth, the Amrit Kaal, 
we seek your blessings for the roadmap that we are unveiling for the next ﬁve years.
In the next ﬁve years, we will take our nation into the top 3 economies of the world, launch a ﬁnal and 
decisive assault against poverty, open up newer avenues of growth in various sectors, further intensify our 
battle against corruption, unveil the next generation of reforms, and take a number of pro-people decisions 
and actions.
Our Sankalp Patra is more than just a collection of promises. This Sankalp Patra outlines the collective 
aspirations and goals of our nation, by our nation and for our nation. As you have seen in the last ten years, 
it is Modi’s Guarantee that every promise made is fulﬁlled.
In 2014, we received your support to bring in a monumental transformation. In 2019, we received an even 
bigger mandate and ensured continued development and took big decisions. In the next ﬁve years, with 
your blessings, it is Modi’s Guarantee that we will work 24 by 7 for 2047.
Your aspiration is our mission. Your dreams are our responsibility.
Let us create a nation that future generations will be proud of!
Vande Mataram!
Your Pradhan Sevak,
Narendra Modi
2


My Dear Brothers and Sisters,
The philosophy of “Antyodaya” has been [MASKED]’s guiding light since its foundation. This has 
manifested itself in various programmes launched by our Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modiji aimed at Garib 
Kalyan.
In just ten years, our government has achieved path-breaking milestones. With Sabka Saath and Sabka Prayas, 
we are committed towards nation-building and promise to ensure Sabka Vikas by strengthening Sabka 
Vishwas in the [MASKED] government. Modi ki Guarantee 2024 Sankalp Patra is our resolve to continue this progress 
and progress forward in our journey.
As we enter Amrit Kaal of Bharat, a new Vision is now in front of us, a Vision driven by the Panch Pran 
enunciated by our Prime Minister. The General Elections of 2024 will be crucial in deﬁning the course of our 
country.  97 crore voters have made up their minds. Citizens want to go forward. Everyone wants to build the 
country. People have decided to defeat the corrupt alliances.
In just ten years, all of us have worked to bring Bharat from Fragile 5 to place it among the Top 5 economies. 
We are secure and safe today because we have a leader who is decisive and bold.  We are building world class 
infrastructure because we have a leader who believes in long term vision.  We are building an equitable society 
because we have a leader who cares.  Modi ki Guarantee is for all sectors and all 140 crore citizens.
We have embraced our rich heritage and diverse culture. Bhavya Ram Mandir in Ayodhya has rejuvenated our 
society. Our cultural and religious sites are being restored across the country.  Our young citizens are ﬁnding a 
new interest in our history and heritage.
Today our voice is being respected on all global platforms because we have a leader who puts Bharat First in all 
international affairs. We are trusted. We are attracting global value chains. We are becoming co-creators of 
technology.
Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has been fulﬁlling our aspirations since 2014.  And today, ten years later, we 
once again seek your vote and support to build the Viksit Bharat that we all have dreamed for.  We seek your 
full support to bring a massive majority to [MASKED] and Narendra Modiji.
Vande Mataram!
Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
National President, [MASKED]
President’s
Note
3


7
Sankalp Patra
Note
My Dear Brothers and Sisters,
As we stand at the cusp of a transformational era in this country, it is a matter of immense pride and 
gratiﬁcation for me to present to you the Modi Ki Guarantee 2024 Sankalp Patra. We have realised the 
importance and signiﬁcance of this document and the immense responsibility that was placed upon us to 
deﬁne the Vision of Viksit Bharat. It is our hope that this document captures the essence of the aspirations of 
the 140 crore Bharatiyas.
The Sankalp Patra has been prepared after elaborate and intensive discussions with people across different 
classes, communities and regions. We have made sure that each and every section of the society was heard 
and was able to share with us their aspirations. We express our sincere gratitude to each and every Bharatiya 
who has given us their suggestions to us through our Viksit Bharat campaign. Your suggestions have made this 
document immensely richer.
This Sankalp Patra is the PM Modi’s guarantee that we will work tirelessly to realise your dreams and 
aspirations. The nation has witnessed immense progress and development in the last 10 years in this 
government under the visionary leadership of PM Shri Narendra Modi. This Sankalp Patra is being presented 
before the 140 crore Bharatiya at a time when Bharat is taking great leaps across all the sectors, ensuring 
welfare of all its citizens. It is this delivery that inspires unwavering conﬁdence in every Modi ki Guarantee 
among the people of Bharat.
When the [MASKED] government came into power in 2014, it faced the daunting task of reviving the stalled 
development caused by widespread corruption, ineffective governance, and indecision during the tenure of 
the previous government. Under the previous government, the nation had plunged into despair due to a lack 
of clear intentions, weak leadership, and a dearth of policies aimed at public welfare. Over the past ten years, 
we have managed to steer the country away from the troubles inherited from a decade of mismanagement by 
the previous government, while also accelerating the pace of development.
The second term of the [MASKED] government under the leadership of PM Shri Narendra Modi is proof that the 
hopes of 140 crore Bharatiya have transformed into a solid trust and conﬁdence. 
I would like to appeal to you to join hands with us and support us in the upcoming elections so that our 
collective dream of Viksit Bharat is realised. 
Vande Mataram! 
Rajnath Singh,
Chairperson of the Manifesto Committee 
4


5
10 YEARS OF
GOOD GOVERNANCE
ANDVIKAS
80+ crore citizens are receiving free rations since 
2020 through PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana
50+ crore citizens have joined the banking system 
through PM Jan Dhan Account
Empowered citizens by transferring ₹34 lakh crore 
directly to their accounts
34+ crore citizens are receiving free health 
insurance of ₹5 lakh under Ayushman Bharat
4+ crore families now have pucca houses under the 
PM Awas Yojana and other initiatives
14+ crore families have access to clean tap water 
under the Jal Jeevan Mission
25 crore citizens have come out of poverty with 
our inclusive approach
THE LAST 10 YEARS PRESENTED A UNIQUE MODEL
OF INCLUSIVE GROWTH TO THE WORLD
Lives of 10+ crore women have been transformed due to free gas connections under the 
PM Ujjwala Yojana
Empowered Muslim women by protecting them 
from the barbaric practice of Triple Talaq
11+ crore women are leading digniﬁed lives by using 
toilets built under the Swachh Bharat Mission.
6+ crore mothers and children have been 
vaccinated under Mission Indradhanush
Increased paid maternity leave from
12 to 26 weeks
GARIB PARIVAR JAN
NARI SHAKTI
5


Improved health care of women by making sanitary pads available for at ₹1
3+ crore women availed maternity services under the PM Matru Vandana Yojana
Empowered women by enacting the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam to provide reservation to 
women in Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies
46+ crore loans worth ₹27+ lakh crore have 
been given under the PM Mudra Yojana
7 IITs, 16 IIITs, 7 IIMs, 15 AIIMS, 315 Medical 
Colleges and 390 universities have been set up.
1.4+ crore young citizens availed skill training 
under the PM Kaushal Vikas Yojana
Enabled the creation of the world’s 
third-largest startup ecosystem
Enacted the Public Examinations (Prevention of 
Unfair Means) Act 2024 to prevent paper leaks
Supported 280 athletes to excel in the Olympics 
and other sporting events under TOPS.
11+ crore farmers are receiving ₹6,000 annually 
under the PM KISAN
Unprecedented hike in MSP
5x increase in the agriculture budget from 2013 
to 2024
Livelihood of 4+ crore farmers protected under 
the PM Fasal Bima Yojana
Ensured affordable fertilisers despite huge 
increase in global prices by providing subsidies 
worth ₹11 lakh crore.
NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE YOUTH
KISAN SAMMAN
6


7
Gave constitutional status to the National Commission for Backward Classes (NCBC)
About 60% of current Ministers are from OBC, SC and ST communities
Three times increase in Eklavya Model Residential Schools since 2014
Instituted 10% reservation for Economically Weaker Sections
PM Vishwakarma Yojana for the holistic welfare and hand-holding of Vishwakarmas was launched 
with an outlay of ₹13,000 crore
63+ lakh street vendors have received easy credit under PM Svanidhi
2.2+ Lakh beneﬁciaries from SC, ST communities and women received easy credit of ₹50,000+ crore 
under Stand Up India
Focus on 112 aspirational districts and 500 aspirational blocks to bring them on par
Started PM Janman Yojana for Particularly Vulnerable Tribal groups with an outlay of ₹24,000+ crore
Started Vibrant Villages programme to develop 662 border villages with an outlay of ₹4,800 crore
Established the basic social security framework for unorganised workers by ensuring their 
recognition and registration through e-Shram and starting schemes like Atal Pension Yojana, PM 
Shramyogi Maandhan Yojana and PM Jeevan Jyoti Beema Yojana
SABKA SAATH SABKA VIKAS
7


People’s dream of 5 centuries of the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya has become a reality
Renovated Shri Kashi Vishwanath Temple, Shri Ujjain Mahakal Temple and Shri Kedarnath Temple 
among others for the revitalisation of ancient traditions
Instituted Janjatiya Gaurav Divas on the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda and are setting 
up 10 Tribal Freedom Fighter Museums
Installed Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose’s statue in the canopy of the India Gate
Construction of a new National War Memorial and new National Police Memorial to honour our 
self-sacriﬁcing soldiers and police personnel
Zero major terror attacks in any city since 2014
Revoked Article 370 leading to a signiﬁcant reduction in violence in Jammu and Kashmir
52% reduction in Left-Wing Extremism-related violence
71% reduction in insurgency related violence in the Northeast resulted in the removal of the AFSPA 
from most areas
We have enacted the Bhartiya Nyay Sanhita which focuses on justice instead of punishments
SURAKSHIT BHARAT
VIRASAT BHI, VIKAS BHI
8


9
From fragile 5 to being one of the top 5 economies 
Introduced GST, Make in India and Production Linked Incentives (PLI) to promote manufacturing
Launched the PM Gati Shakti portal for integrated planning of infrastructure
Constructing 28 km of national highways every day
Constructing 14.5 km of railway lines every day, operationalized dedicated freight corridors and 
redeveloping 1,300+ railway stations
Expanded metro services to 20+ cities
Constructed 3.7 lakh km of rural roads in villages under PM Gram Sadak Yojana
Eliminated unmanned level railway crossings
Doubled the capacity of the ports in the country
Doubled the number of operational airports in India
Introduced Vande Bharat Express, Amrit Bharat, Namo Bharat and other new-age trains
Increased the non-fossil fuel energy capacity by 2.5 times to 180 GW
Achieved 100% electriﬁcation by providing electricity connection to 2.8+ crore families under 
Saubhagya
Unprecedented improvements in connectivity of the Northeast by expansion of roads, bridges, 
railways and airports
Achieved the fastest 5G rollout in the world with the most affordable data prices
Cleaned up public procurement through GEM
ROBUST ECONOMY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
9


Evacuation and safe return of 1.5+ crore citizens in distress situations
Successfully hosted the historic G20 Summit, achieving 100% consensus on the New Delhi 
Declaration
Bharat becomes Voice of the Global South
Digital India Stack, including UPI, becomes global
Trading started in INR with 27 partner countries
Leading the development of the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor
Provided COVID assistance, including 30+ crore COVID-19 vaccines and medicines, to 100 countries 
through Vaccine Maitri
Ensuring freedom of navigation and maritime security in the Indian Ocean  
Became the ﬁrst country in the world to land successfully  near the South Pole of the moon through 
Chandrayaan 3
The UN declared 21st June as the International Day of Yoga at Bharat’s initiative
The UN International Year of Millets at Bharat’s initiative brought Shree Anna into the global 
discourse
BHARAT ON THE GLOBAL STAGE
10


11
We are committed to supporting every garib parivar in coming out of poverty and 
leading a digniﬁed life. We have undertaken various measures for Garib Kalyan in the 
last ten years with good results. We will continue to focus on empowering our garib 
parivar jan to improve their quality of life, increase income, and live with dignity.
Free Ration for the Next 5 Years
We have provided free ration to 80+ crore citizens since 2020. We will continue to provide free ration for 
the next ﬁve years under PM Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana.
Expanding Our Efforts to Protect Garib ki Thali
We have worked on protecting garib ki thali by establishing a price stabilisation fund for vegetables and 
pulses. We will expand our efforts to protect the garib ki thali by becoming Atmanirbhar in the 
production of pulses, edible oils and vegetables.
Continue Providing Free and Quality Health Care
We have provided quality free health treatment of up to ₹5 lakh to poor families under Ayushman 
Bharat. We will continue to provide free health treatment by strengthening Ayushman Bharat and other 
such initiatives.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
GARIB PARIVAR JAN
11


12
Expanding PM Awas Yojana
We have improved the living conditions of 4+ crore garib parivar under PM Awas Yojana. We recognise the 
far-reaching beneﬁts of this programme. We will now further expand the PM Awas Yojana to ensure 
every garib parivar has access to quality housing.
Har Ghar Nal se Jal
We will ensure clean drinking water, Har Ghar Nal se Jal for all households in villages, towns and cities. We 
will extensively use technology to reduce the wastage of water.
Slum Redevelopment
We have successfully provided houses to many slum dwellers. We will scale it up by making new policies 
to construct houses on slum land so low-income families can be rehabilitated into high-quality houses.
Clean Cooking Fuel
Under PM Ujjwala Yojana more than 10 crore beneﬁciaries have been provided LPG connections. We will 
continue this and expand the programme.
Zero Electricity Bill
We will provide free electricity to poor households under PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana.
12


13
Our middle-class parivar jan are the backbone of our economy. Through their hard 
work, they are contributing a lot to Bharat’s economic growth. We are committed to 
support the aspirations of middle-class parivar jan, providing them opportunities to 
fulﬁl their dreams and creating conditions for a better quality of life.
Empowering the Neo-Middle Class
The last 10 years have seen a large number of families join the ranks of the neo-middle class due to a 
steady increase in the incomes of all citizens. It is our responsibility to help them grow further while 
giving them enough support to stabilise their standard of living. This includes support for affordable 
quality housing and healthcare, access to quality education and ample employment opportunities.
Fulﬁlling the Dream of Owning a Home
We will strengthen the RERA act which has helped make the real estate sector in Bharat more 
transparent and citizen friendly than ever before. We will work with the state governments to facilitate 
home ownership for middle-class parivar jan through comprehensive measures including cost reduction 
in construction and registration, regulatory reforms like enabling automatic approvals for standard 
housing designs, among others. 
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
MIDDLE-CLASS
PARIVAR JAN
13


14
Creating High Value Jobs
We will expand Bharat's top-tier startup ecosystem to tier-2 and tier-3 cities. Further, we will transform 
Bharat into a global centre for high quality services including tourism to generate high value and diverse 
employment opportunities nationwide.
Ensuring Quality Health Care for the Middle Class
We have provided high quality healthcare services to the middle class families by expanding the AIIMS 
and Ayushman Arogya Mandir network. We have provided subsidised medicines through Jan Aushadhi 
Kendras and also established 315 new medical colleges across the country. We will continue to expand 
these services for our middle class families to ensure accessible high quality healthcare services.
Promoting Quality Higher Education
We will elevate the quality of education by expanding top educational institutions and upgrading 
universities to global standards. We will introduce more IITs, IIMs, AIIMS and other such institutes. We will 
launch internship programmes to blend academic and practical skills.
Improving Infrastructure for Ease of Living
We will focus on the modern road network, enhance rail and metro connectivity with new-age trains and 
expanded networks, develop comprehensive EV charging stations, construct new airports and advance 
our telecom infrastructure with affordable 5G and innovative 6G technology, promoting ease of living for 
middle class families.
Developing Sustainable Cities
We will develop more green spaces like parks, playgrounds etc., revive water bodies like lakes and ponds 
and develop other natural spaces to make cities more adaptable, sustainable and people-friendly.
14


15
Our vision is to create a Viksit Bharat where Nari Shakti is an equal partner and 
stakeholder in society’s progress. Through a series of legal and policy frameworks, we 
will ensure the dignity of women and provide them with equal growth opportunities.
Three Crore Lakhpati Didis
We have empowered one crore rural women to become Lakhpati Didis. We will now empower three crore 
rural women to become Lakhpati Didis.
Integrating Women SHGs in the Service Sector
We will empower women Self-Help Groups (SHGs) with the skills and tools in key service sectors like IT, 
healthcare, education, retail and tourism with an aim to increase their income.
Enhancing Market Access for Women SHG Enterprises
We will integrate women Self-Help Groups (SHGs) with ongoing initiatives such as One District One 
Product (ODOP), Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Ekta Mall, ONDC, GEM, One Station One Product, 
enhancing better market access for their products.
Facilitating Participation of Women in the Workforce
We will ensure development of infrastructure such as working women’s hostels, creches etc. with the 
speciﬁc focus on locations near industrial and commercial centres to facilitate increased participation of 
women in the workforce. 
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
NARI SHAKTI
15


16
Increasing Women’s Participation in Sports 
Our women sports persons have brought honours to our country. We will encourage greater 
participation of women in sports by launching women sportsperson-focused programmes and facilities.
Constructing and Maintaining Public Toilets for Women
We have provided digniﬁed lives to women by constructing public and individual toilets under Swachh 
Bharat Mission. We are further committed to upholding the dignity of women by continuing to construct 
and maintain public toilets.
Ensuring Women’s Health and Well-Being
We will expand the existing health services focussed on the prevention and reduction of Anaemia, Breast 
Cancer, Cervical Cancer and Osteoporosis, ensuring a healthy life for women. We will launch a focussed 
initiative to eliminate cervical cancer.
Implementing the Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam
We have enacted the long-awaited Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam. We will systematically implement this 
to ensure representation for women in the Parliament and State Legislatures.
Expanding Shakti Desks
We have established Shakti Desks (Women Help Desks) in police stations. We will further ensure their 
expansion for timely investigation and resolution of issues.
Strengthening Emergency Helpline 112
We will strengthen the Emergency Response Support System and enhance the capabilities of 
Emergency Helpline 112
16


17
Young citizens form an essential pillar of our commitment towards building a Viksit Bharat. 
Our vision is to build a Viksit Bharat where young citizens can fully realise their potential. We 
will develop an integrated education framework under the NEP, to ensure young citizens 
have the opportunity to earn while they learn. We guarantee high-quality education, 
world-class sports facilities, employment and entrepreneurial opportunities to all young 
citizens through the NEP and other programmes.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
YOUNG CITIZENS
Transparent Government Recruitment
Implementing Law to Prevent Paper Leaks
We have already enacted a strict law to stop misconduct in recruitment exams across the country. We 
will strictly implement this law to ensure strict punishment to those playing with the future of our 
youth.
Conducting Transparent Public Exams 
We have set the example for conducting recruitment exams in a transparent manner and recruited lakhs 
of youth for government jobs. We will continue to ﬁll the government vacancies in a time bound and 
transparent manner. We will also extend the central government capacity to states that request 
support in conducting recruitment examinations.
17


18
Amrit Peedhi
Involving the Youth in Nation Building
We have launched ‘Mera Yuva Bharat (MY Bharat)’ to involve the youth in nation building. One crore 
youth have already enrolled in MY Bharat. This will be enhanced to develop leadership skills and spirit of 
volunteering by providing equitable access for participation in government initiatives. 
 
Expanding the Startup Ecosystem
We have successfully established Bharat among the top 3 Startup Ecosystems through various 
interventions ranging from Atal Tinkering Labs, Hackathon, Startup India and Start Up India Seed Fund 
Scheme. We will build upon this success and expand this ecosystem by making Bharat a preferred 
destination for startups, supported by robust investment, mentorship and a culture that celebrates 
entrepreneurial risk-taking. We will work with the private sector to expand the incubator network and 
link them with higher education institutes to promote entrepreneurship among our students.
Expand Funding for Startups
We will expand the existing Startup India Seed Fund Scheme and Startup Credit Guarantee Scheme to 
ensure adequate funds for our start-ups in their entrepreneurial journeys.
Providing Mentorship to Startups
We have successfully provided mentorship under the Atal Innovation Mission where more than 6,000 
mentors are already present. We will continue establishing tie-ups with globally recognised mentors to 
support the startups in their journeys to success.
Encouraging Startups in Government Procurement
We have taken initiatives in many departments including defence and railways to support procurement 
from startups. We will prepare a strong framework to further encourage startups in government 
procurement.
Increasing Employment Opportunities in Manufacturing
With PLI and Make in India programmes, manufacturing has emerged as a major economic sector with 
good success in electronics, defence, mobile, automobile, etc. We will continue to work towards making 
Bharat a global manufacturing hub and enhance employment in this crucial sector.
Employment Generation Through Investment in Infrastructure
Unprecedented investment in infrastructure has created a large number of employment opportunities. 
We will continue this investment for employment growth.
Establishing Global Centres for High-Value Services
We will further strengthen our efforts to make Bharat the global hub for High-Value Services by 
establishing more Global Capability Centres (GCCs), Global Tech Centres (GTCs) and Global Engineering 
Centres (GECs).
Vibrant Startup Ecosystem
Ensuring Employment Opportunities for Youth
18


19
Promoting the Entrepreneurial Spirit
We recognize the entrepreneurial potential of our youth. We will expand credit programmes like Mudra 
to support all aspiring entrepreneurs in starting and sustaining their ventures. The Mudra loan limit will 
be doubled up to ₹20 lakh and provided to entrepreneurs who have availed and successfully repaid 
previous loans under the Tarun category.
Providing New Employment Opportunities in Tourism
Our rich cultural heritage is the centre of global attraction. Our efforts at improving connectivity, building 
better infrastructure and reaching out to the world has signiﬁcantly increased tourist footfall. We will 
expand the range of programmes to further expand the tourism sector and increase employment 
opportunities.
19


20
Joint families are an important factor of our robust social and cultural heritage. Our 
society is undergoing a major change in today’s time. To cope with these changes, we 
have initiated a variety of steps, drawing upon our social traditions, to provide a 
robust eldercare ecosystem in modern times.  We will expand these programmes with 
focus on digniﬁed elderly living.
Ayushman for Senior Citizens
We will expand the Ayushman Bharat Yojana to cover Senior Citizens and provide them access to free 
and quality healthcare.
Facilitating Knowledge Sharing by Senior Citizens
We will introduce a National Senior Citizens portal to honour the wisdom and experience of our elders by 
providing them with a platform for sharing their stories, insights and knowledge.
Delivering Government Services at Doorstep
We will ensure seamless access to social security beneﬁts and other essential government services to 
senior citizens by leveraging the extensive reach and reliability of the postal and digital network.
Digital Empowerment for Senior Citizens
We will provide senior citizens with comprehensive training in using UPI and other online payment 
methods, while also educating them on how to recognize and avoid digital scams.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
SENIOR CITIZENS
20


21
Organising Ayush Camps
We will organise regular Ayush camps to provide holistic healthcare solutions rooted in Ayurveda, Yoga 
and other traditional practices to promote active living and vitality of elders.
Ensuring Senior Citizen-Friendly Public Infrastructure
We will implement age-friendly public infrastructure and transportation systems to facilitate mobility 
and independence for senior citizens.
Facilitate Convenient Teerth Yatra
We will work with state governments to ensure convenient facilities for senior citizens to undertake 
sacred pilgrimages across the country.
21


The dignity and empowerment of farmers is one of our top-most priorities. We have 
empowered our Kisans through a variety of measures including soil health card, 
micro-irrigation, crop insurance, seed supply, and direct ﬁnancial assistance under PM 
Kisan Samman Yojana.  We have increased MSP multi-fold.  We are committed to 
support our Kisan families and empower them to lead better lives.
Strengthening PM KISAN
We are providing annual ﬁnancial assistance of ₹6,000 under PM Kisan Samman Nidhi Yojana. We are 
committed to sustained ﬁnancial support for our farmers.
Strengthening PM Fasal Bima Yojana
We will further strengthen the PM Fasal Bima Yojana through more technological interventions to 
ensure speedy and more accurate assessment, faster payouts and quicker grievance resolution.
Increase in MSP
We have ensured unprecedented increase in MSP for major crops, and we will continue to increase MSP 
from time to time.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
KISAN SAMMAN
Making Agriculture Remunerative
22


Ensuring Access to Robust Agri Infrastructure
Atmanirbhar in Pulses and Edible Oil
We will support Annadatas to make Bharat Atmanirbhar in the production of pulses (like tur, urad, 
masoor, moong and chana) and edible oil production (like mustard, soybean, til and groundnut).
New Clusters for Vegetable Production and Storage
We will support Annadatas with requisite farming inputs to increase the production of nutritious 
vegetables by establishing new clusters for the production of essentials like onion, tomato, potato etc. 
We will also set up storage and logistics facilities at these clusters.
Positioning Bharat as the Nutri-Hub of the World
Building on the success of the International Year of Millets, we will promote Shree Anna (millets) for food 
security, nutrition and environmental sustainability and make Bharat a Global Millet Hub.
Millet as Super Food
We have ensured that Millet gets the global recognition and will now promote it as the global superfood. 
We will also focus on expanding its cultivation among small farmers, promote research and international 
marketing to underscore its health and sustainability advantages.
Strengthening Natural Farming
We will launch the National Mission on Natural Farming to promote nature-friendly, climate-resilient, 
remunerative agriculture for food and nutrition secure Bharat.
Further Incentivising Crop Diversiﬁcation
We have incentivized crop diversiﬁcation with appropriate price support strategy. Building on this, we 
are committed to further expand crop diversiﬁcation to make agriculture sustainable and remunerative. 
Krishi Infrastructure Mission
We will launch a Krishi Infrastructure Mission for integrated planning and coordinated implementation of 
agri-infrastructure projects like storage facilities, irrigation, grading and sorting units, cold storage 
facilities, and food processing among others.
Expanding Irrigation Facilities
We have created a 25.5 lakh hectare irrigation capacity under the PM Krishi Sinchai Yojana. Further, we 
will launch technology-enabled irrigation initiatives to implement cutting-edge technology for efficient 
water management.
Network of Grain Storage Facilities in Rural Areas
We will develop a substantial storage capacity in PACS under the world's largest grain storage scheme in 
the cooperative sector. We will complement it with basic facilities like grading, sorting, processing and 
packing.
Launching Krishi Satellite
We will launch an indigenous Bharat Krishi satellite for farm-related activities like crop forecasting, 
pesticide application, irrigation, soil health, and weather forecasting, among others.
23


Digital Public Infrastructure in Agriculture
We will develop Digital Public Infrastructure to remove information asymmetry in agriculture and 
provide farmer-centric solutions and services.
Doubling Custom Hiring Centres
We have already established 25,000 custom hiring centres. We will double the number of custom hiring 
centres, focusing on making agricultural machinery and equipment at stable prices.
Upgrading Krishi Vigyan Kendra
We have upgraded KVKs to provide digital solutions to our farmers. We will further upgrade all Krishi 
Vigyan Kendra into a one-stop centre for skill development.
Expanding PM Kisan Samriddhi Kendras
We have established PM Kisan Samriddhi Kendras to provide all agricultural inputs and services as 
one-stop shops to our farmers. We will further expand the network of PM Kisan Samriddhi Kendras.
Ensuring High-Yielding Seeds
We will encourage farmers to use high-yielding, climate resilient and bio-fortiﬁed varieties of seeds.
Expanding access to Nano Urea
We have started using nano-urea to ensure continued soil fertility in Indian farmlands. We will further 
expand access to and encourage adoption of Nano Urea. 
Easy Accessibility of Agricultural Inputs
24


25
Focusing on Allied Sectors
Expand the Network of Dairy Cooperatives
We will expand the network of dairy cooperatives in villages in the next ﬁve years with facilities of 
fodder banks, milk testing laboratories, bulk milk coolers, and milk processing units.
Protecting Indigenous Breeds
We will make efforts to protect indigenous cattle breeds, and make efforts to increase their productivity 
and preserve their genetic diversity.
Eliminating Major Veterinary Diseases
We will eliminate FMD (Foot and Mouth Disease) and will also control brucellosis through a massive 
vaccination campaign.
Sahakar se Samriddhi
We will bring the National Cooperative Policy with a view to make the cooperative movement strong, 
efficient, transparent, technically rich and vibrant at the grassroots level.
25


26
Extending PM Matsya Sampada Yojana
We will further extend the PM Matsya Sampada Yojana to increase ﬁsh production and increase our 
annual seafood exports.
Insurance for Fisheries
We will further strengthen and expand the insurance coverage available under PM Matsya Sampada 
Yojana through more technological interventions to ensure speedy and more accurate assessment, 
faster payouts and quicker grievance resolution. 
Developing Production and Processing Clusters for Fishermen
We will develop production and processing clusters with special attention to women of coastal 
communities
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
FISHERMEN
FAMILIES
We are committed to advancing the prosperity and welfare of our ﬁshermen by 
enhancing ﬁsheries through initiatives like the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana, modernising infrastructure, and providing ﬁnancial support and skill 
development. Our efforts are aimed at empowering ﬁshermen families to thrive and 
contribute to the nation's Blue Revolution.
26


27
Seaweed Farming
We will boost seaweed cultivation under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana to increase income 
of ﬁshermen.
Pearl Farming
We will create sustainable livelihood opportunities for ﬁshermen through promotion of pearl farming.
Establishing Nucleus Breeding Centres and Brood Banks
We will increase production and productivity in the ﬁsheries sector through establishment of a network 
of Nucleus Breeding Centres and Brood Banks.
Using Satellite Imagery for Protecting Fishermen
 We will launch a special programme utilising satellite imagery for rendering integrated service for the 
ﬁshermen community, ensuring both their safety and security.
Using Technology to Aid Fishermen
We will make use of a series of technological interventions for farm biosecurity, management of 
diseases in aquatic animals, feed and growth monitoring. We will make use of drone technology for 
management of the ﬁsheries and aquaculture industries.
27


Our Shramik bandhus are major contributors to the progress of Bharat. We will 
empower our Shramik Bandhus with the aim to provide the best opportunities and 
facilitate ease of working for all workers including gig workers, truck drivers, porters, 
domestic workers, and street vendors, among others.
Periodic Review of National Floor Wages
We will ensure a review of National Floor Wages from time to time.
Social Security through Post Offices and Digital India
We have successfully implemented social security insurance schemes like PM Jeevan Bima and Suraksha 
Bima for unorganised workers. We will now integrate all such schemes and use the post office and Digital 
India network to provide comprehensive social security cover for accident and life insurance. We will use 
digital technologies for easy enrollment and seamless payment.
Coverage of workers in e-Shram
We have registered unorganised workers on the e-Shram platform.  We will reach out to the eShram 
registered shramik bandhu and help them avail the beneﬁts of various government programmes that 
they are eligible for.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
SHRAMIK SAMMAN
28


Onboarding Gig workers on e-Shram
We will work with platforms for registration of Gig workers on eShram and reach out to such shramik 
bandhus to help them avail the beneﬁts of various programmes that they are eligible for.
Reaching out to Migrant workers registered on e-Shram
We will reach out to migrant workers and empower them to avail beneﬁts of various programmes that 
they are eligible for.   
Special Train Services for Migrant Workers
We are running special train services on important occasions for helping the migrant workers travel to 
and from their homes.  We will enhance these services so that migrant workers can travel without any 
hassles.
Expanding PM Svanidhi for Street Vendors
We have empowered street vendors by providing credit facilities to 63+ lakh street vendors under PM 
Svanidhi. We will continue to further expand PM Svanidhi to cover street vendors, travelling salesmen 
among others from small towns and villages across Bharat.
Establishing Facilities for Drivers along National Highways
We will introduce a new scheme for truck drivers under which modern facilities will be developed along 
the national highways.
Including Auto, Taxi, Truck and Other Drivers in All Social Security Schemes
We will onboard auto, taxi, truck and other drivers on e-Shram portal and ensure 100% coverage of all 
drivers under insurance and other welfare programmes.
29


Small traders and Vishwakarma families have been a backbone of our economy for centuries. 
We are committed to foster a vibrant, resilient, and innovative environment for MSMEs, Small 
Traders, and Vishwakarma families that acts as a cornerstone of sustainable economic 
growth, empowering communities, and driving inclusive development across the nation.
Providing Easy Working Capital
We will use the Digital India infrastructure developed over the last 10 years to create a robust and easy 
Digital Credit solution to support the growth of small traders and MSMEs.
Strengthening PM Vishwakarma Yojana
For the ﬁrst time since independence, we have initiated a specially designed programme for the 
upliftment of Vishwakarma families.  Under this programme, we are providing ﬁnancial assistance, credit 
facilities, training and skill development, and providing market access to Vishwakarma families. We will 
further strengthen Bharat’s Vishwakarmas through a series of such initiatives.
Simplifying Compliances and Laws 
We will reduce compliances for small traders and MSMEs to enhance their ease of living and ease of 
doing business. We will work with State governments and encourage them to simplify State legislations.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
MSME, SMALL TRADERS
AND VISHWAKARMAS
30


31
Empowering Small Traders and MSMEs with ONDC
We will encourage small traders and MSMEs to adopt ONDC and expand their businesses using the power 
of technology.
Protecting against Cyber threats
We will create a suite of public cybersecurity products to help small traders and MSMEs protect 
themselves against the cyber threats and frauds.
Launching Affordable Insurance Products
We will launch affordable insurance products for small traders and MSMEs to protect them from 
accidents like ﬁre, theft, natural disasters etc.  
GST Portal
We will further simplify the GST portal to increase accessibility to users, especially MSMEs and small 
traders.
            Transforming Traditional Handicraft
We will modernise traditional crafts by facilitating design interventions by collaborating with design skill 
institutes and setting up a Handicraft Design Bank to upskill traditional artisans, opening doors to global 
market opportunities and transforming their craft into sustainable livelihood.   
Expanding Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras
We will expand the network of Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras to provide easy export facility to MSMEs, Small 
Traders, and Vishwakarma Families.
Khadi As a Global Brand
We will rejuvenate and reposition Khadi as a national and global brand for sustainable lifestyle and 
undertake structural reforms to achieve these objectives. 
Toy Export Hub
We will transform Bharat into the global hub for toy manufacturing, leveraging our skilled workforce and 
rich cultural heritage to produce innovative and high-quality toys. 
31


Our party has focused on the welfare of the most vulnerable families right from the 
beginning.  Vanchito ko Variyata and Antyodaya form the core of our philosophy.  Sabka 
Saath, Sabka Vikas drives the policies.  We stand committed to improving the lives of all 
marginalised sections of the society.  Viksit Bharat will be Inclusive Bharat.
Recognising Contributions of Tribal Communities
We instituted the Janjatiya Gaurav Diwas to recognise the huge contribution made by our tribal 
communities. We will take this forward by declaring the year 2025 (the 150th Birth Anniversary of 
Bhagwan Birsa Munda) as Janjatiya Gaurav Varsh.
Focussed Approach for Tribal Healthcare
We will work towards elimination of malnutrition amongst tribal children and to provide comprehensive 
health care and services in mission mode in tribal areas. We will work towards eliminating sickle cell 
anaemia.
Preserving and Promoting Rich Tribal Heritage and Culture
We are committed to honouring and preserving the culture of tribal communities by
Increasing funds to Tribal Research Institutes to promote, preserve, and disseminate research 
on the rich tapestry of tribal heritage
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
SABKA SAATH
SABKA VIKAS
32


Protect and preserve tribal languages using series of programmes
Continuing our initiative to set up Tribal Freedom Fighter Museums to celebrate the 
socio-cultural heritage and contribution of tribal freedom ﬁghters to our freedom movement.
Establish a Digital Tribal Arts Academy to promote tribal art forms
Preserve and promote tribal medicinal traditions
Creating a District Level Committee
We will establish a District level committee to ensure that welfare schemes reach the lowest level. We 
will ensure adequate representation for SC,ST and OBCs in this committee.
PM-Suraj
We will provide accessible credit facilities to eligible individuals to enable them to access livelihood 
opportunities through the PM Suraj portal.
Unlocking the Potential of Minor Forest Produce
We will encourage innovative and technology-driven startups to initiate commercially viable and 
sustainable forest-based enterprises and value addition for forest produce. We will associate all eligible 
tribal self-help groups with Vandhan Vikas Kendra, FPOs, NRLM for scaling up the activities relating to 
minor forest produces and will be provided skill and entrepreneurial training.
Expediting the Establishment of Eklavya Model Residential Schools
We have emphasised the education of tribal children with a target of setting up 740 Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools. We will expedite the construction and operationalization of the remaining schools.
Improving Socio-Economic Status of PVTG
We will invest ₹24,000 crore through PM JANMAN to bring the socio-economic status of the Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Group on par with society.
Representation of OBC, SC and ST Communities in Governance
We have 60% current ministers in the Union Council of Ministers from OBC, SC and ST communities. We 
have provided constitutional status to the National Commission for Backward Classes. The beneﬁts of all 
Garib Kalyan programmes have reached the OBC, SC and ST families.  We are committed to Sabka Saath, 
Sabka Vikas and adequate participation of all sections in our journey to Viksit Bharat.
Expanding Livelihood Opportunities for OBC, SC & ST families
We will expand livelihood opportunities for all families, including OBC, SC & ST, by measures like doubling 
the MUDRA loan limit to ₹20 lakh.  We will further expand the successful schemes such as PM Svanidhi 
and PM Vishwakaram Yojana, among others. We will further expand employment opportunities through 
Eco Tourism and Homestay.
Expanding Scholarship Schemes for Students of OBC, SC & ST Communities
We will ensure that no student of the OBC, SC and ST families are deprived of higher education due to 
affordability by expanding existing scholarships for meritorious students.
Expanding Skilling Opportunities for OBC, SC and ST communities
We will further expand skilling opportunities including recognition and certiﬁcation of prior skills.
Empowerment of Nomadic Tribes
We have introduced several welfare schemes for nomadic tribes, which have brought a positive change 
in their lives. We will further expand all these schemes.
33


Empowerment of Safai Karamcharis
We have started ‘Namaste Yojana’ for Safai Karamcharis which in addition to other welfare schemes 
have ensured safety, respect and livelihood for Safai Karamcharis. We will continue to expand these 
initiatives. 
Developing Affordable Indigenous Assistive Devices for Divyangs
We will continue developing affordable, indigenous aids and assistive devices to make Bharat 
atmanirbhar in such equipment.
Providing Affordable Housing Priority to Divyangs under the PM Awas Yojana
We will continue to prioritize the housing needs of divyangs under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, 
guaranteeing affordable and accessible housing solutions that cater to their unique requirements.
Expanding the Network of Garima Grahas for Transgenders
We will expand the network of Garima Grahas to cater to the needs of transgender individuals. We will 
issue identity cards to ensure their recognition nationwide. Furthermore, all eligible transgender 
individuals will be covered under the Ayushman Bharat Yojana.
Leverage Technology for Linguistic Minorities
We will work on creation of a technology-based system such as Bhashini for preservation/ facilitating 
translation of languages of linguistic minorities.
34


35
We have established Bharat as a reliable, trusted and dependable voice globally in the last 
ten years. We have demonstrated Bharat’s independence of thought and action for the 
beneﬁt of humanity. Our human-centric worldview has helped to be a consensus builder,
ﬁrst responder and a voice of the Global South. Today, the world believes that Bharat is the 
Mother of Democracy. Our diaspora around the world feels empowered and connected. Our 
civilizational values, thoughts, wisdom and traditional knowledge have found a place of pride 
at the world stage. We will strengthen our position and conduct our policies to further our 
national interests with the spirit of Vishwa Bandhu.
Leading the Global South
We will further consolidate Bharat’s position as a Voice of the Global South by using the Prime Minister’s 
visionary 5S approach of Samman, Samvad, Sahyog, Shanti and Samriddhi.
First Responder Bharat
We will further promote Bharat’s reputation as a trusted global partner and a ﬁrst responder, continuing 
our humanitarian assistance and disaster relief programmes.
Becoming a Permanent Member of the UN Security Council
We are committed to seeking permanent membership in the UN Security Council to elevate Bharat’s 
position in  global decision making.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
VISHWA BANDHU
BHARAT
A Bharat First Foreign Policy
35


Creating a Global Consensus on Fight Against Terrorism
We will continue our efforts to create a consensus among all members of the United Nations on the 
Comprehensive Convention against International Terrorism and other such efforts to combat terrorism. 
We will build upon the success of the ‘No Money for Terror’ conference to develop better coordination on 
countering terrorism ﬁnancing.
Following the Neighbourhood First Policy
We will continue being a trusted and responsible partner in the subcontinent, promoting regional 
cooperation and ensuring stability and prosperity.
Strengthening Maritime Vision (SAGAR)
We will continue to collaborate with the countries of the Indo-Paciﬁc Region for the security and growth 
of all in the Region.
Establishment of IMEC to promote Bharat’s trade interests
We will facilitate the international movement of trade and services through Bharat by boosting 
connectivity to Europe via the India-Middle East-Europe Corridor.
Developing Strategic Partnerships for Mineral Security
In our endeavour to secure mineral resources for Bharat, we will work to establish collaborative 
partnerships across the globe. Through these partnerships, we will integrate ourselves in global supply 
chains, and develop mining, processing and related technologies while prioritising sustainable 
development practices.
Expanding Bharat’s Diplomatic Network
We will further expand the network of our missions and diplomats to pursue the global interests that 
have been secured by Bharat’s unprecedented rise in the global order.
Bharatiya Diaspora for Growth and Development
We will fortify our connection with the Bharatiya diaspora, actively involving them in Bharat's progress 
and providing unwavering support during their times of need, thereby enriching our mutual cultural and 
economic ties.
36


37
Establishing Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centres Globally
We will establish Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centres across the globe to showcase Bharat’s rich culture and 
offer training in yoga, ayurveda, Bharatiya languages, classical music etc. We will promote Bharat’s rich 
democratic traditions going back millennia as the Mother of Democracy.
Pioneering International Alliances
We will continue forming and leading alliances of like-minded partners in areas of mutual interest such 
as the International Solar Alliance, the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure, the One Future 
Alliance, the Global Biofuels Alliance and the Big Cat Alliance.
Taking our Digital Public Infrastructure to the World
The role of Bharat’s Digital Public Infrastructure in revolutionising public service delivery is appreciated 
all over the world. We will work towards sharing this technology with partner countries.
Taking Yoga and Ayurveda to the World
We will facilitate Yoga and Ayurveda Institutes in all the major countries for providing certiﬁed courses. 
We will also establish a globally recognised certiﬁcation mechanism for Yoga and Ayurveda.
Bringing Back Bharatiya Artefacts
We will relentlessly work towards bringing back Bharatiya idols and artefacts that were taken away 
illegally from Bharat.
Encourage Classical Language Research
We will encourage the study of classical Indian languages in major educational institutions across the 
world
Revitalising Bharatiya Civilizational Monuments
We will collaborate with countries across the globe to restore and revitalise sites of Bharatiya 
civilization. 
Preserving and Promoting the Legacy of Lord Ram
Ramayan is celebrated across the world, particularly in South and South-East Asia. We will launch a 
global outreach program for documenting and promoting the tangible and intangible legacy of Lord Ram 
in all countries. We will celebrate Ramayan Utsav with great fervour across the globe to commemorate 
the Pran Pratishtha of Ram Lalla
Elevating Bharat as a Global Soft Power
Celebrating Bharat’s Rich Cultural Heritage
37


In the last ten years, we have taken a ﬁrm stand on protecting our country and 
citizens from the threats of terrorism and naxalism. We have followed a zero tolerance 
policy on terrorism. We remain committed to keep our country and citizens safe.
Continuing a Zero-Tolerance Policy Towards Terrorism
The Surgical Strikes of 2016 and the Air Strikes of 2019 are examples of our dedicated efforts towards 
countering terrorism. We are committed to defend Bharat's citizens and interests at home and abroad 
from all threats of terrorism.
Theatrization of Military Commands
We have established the position of Chief of Defense staff (CDS) for better coordination in the military. 
We will further establish the military theatre commands for more efficient operations.
Ensuring Robust Infrastructure Along Borders
The gross neglect by previous governments resulted in poor infrastructure in border areas. We have 
corrected this grave error and started constructing roads, railway, telecom towers, optical ﬁbre cables 
and electricity networks. We will accelerate development of robust infrastructure along the Indo-China, 
Indo-Pakistan and Indo-Myanmar borders. We will introduce technological solutions on fenced portions 
to make fencing smarter.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
SURAKSHIT BHARAT
38


Reinforcing Our Fight Against Drugs
We will aim towards eliminating the threat of drugs on our society, especially our young citizens, through 
a series of technical, legal and intelligence programmes. We will work on enforcement and reducing 
demand for drugs. We will leverage Big Data analytics, artiﬁcial intelligence, drones and satellite imagery 
to detect and dismantle drug trafficking networks effectively.
Implementing Bhartiya Nyay Sahita Expeditiously
We have enacted Bharatiya Nyay Sanhita to ensure security as well as justice delivery for our citizens. We 
are committed to its effective implementation through training, online certiﬁcate courses, new 
curriculum in universities and law schools, and many additional measures.
Eliminating Left Wing Extremism (LWE)
We will strengthen our paramilitary forces with state-of-the-art equipment and trained personnel to 
eliminate LWE in all its forms. Our development measures have weakened the false propaganda spread 
by extremists. We will ensure that the development and welfare schemes reach the people living in 
areas affected by Left Wing Extremism. With this 360 degree approach, we will eliminate LWE in our 
journey towards Viksit Bharat.
Implementation of CAA
We have taken the historic step of enacting the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and will implement it 
to confer citizenship to all eligible persons.
Enhancing the Capabilities of the Armed Forces and the Central Armed Police Forces
We will further equip the Armed Forces and the Central Armed Police Forces with modern 
state-of-the-art weapons, equipment and technology to aid the swift disposal of any current and 
emerging threats. 
National Forensics Mission
To move away from ‘punishment to justice, and improve the current conviction rate in the country, we 
will launch a National Forensics Mission to strengthen the forensic infrastructure.
Protecting Bharat's Security Interests in the Indian Ocean Region
We will expand Bharat’s defence footprint across strategic locations and partner with friendly countries 
to protect Bharat’s and the Indian Ocean Region’s security interests.
Safeguarding Bharat's Digital Sovereignty
We will take further steps towards strengthening Bharat’s digital sovereignty and will take stringent 
action against digital entities that threaten the safety of Bharatiya on the internet.
Implementing Robust Cyber Security Policies
To regulate and monitor Bharat’s cyber protection agencies and infrastructure, we will develop and 
implement robust cyber security policies.
39


We have successfully brought Bharat from fragile 5 to top 5 economies despite the global turmoil 
and once-in-a-century event Covid pandemic.  We have strengthened our ﬁnancial system, 
maintained ﬁscal prudence, and increased our foreign exchange reserves.  We have successfully 
shielded our citizens from global price shocks and created a conducive environment for economic 
growth.  Our policies have resulted in Bharat becoming the 5th largest economy.  We will build upon 
this foundation in the next ﬁve years to launch our country on the path to Viksit Bharat by 2047.
Make Bharat the Third-Largest Economy
Within a decade, we have brought Bharat from 11th to 5th largest economic power. This was possible due 
to right policies, focussed execution and meticulous planning. We guarantee that Bharat will be the 3rd 
largest economic power.
Sustaining Financial Macro Stability
We have demonstrated low inﬂation, high growth and ﬁscal prudence in the past decade. We will 
continue on this path and stay committed to expand our economic prowess.
Expanding Employment Opportunities
Despite global challenges and unprecedented events such as the Covid pandemic, our economic policies 
have been successful in creating a substantial number of employment opportunities. Our strategic focus 
on sectors like manufacturing, services, rural industry, infrastructure, tourism, and skill development, 
coupled with support through credit facilities via Svanidhi and Mudra, has greatly expanded livelihood 
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
PROSPEROUS
BHARAT
40


prospects. We are committed to increase employment, self-employment, and the enhancement of 
livelihood opportunities for our citizens.
Developing Bharat as a Trusted Global Value Chain Partner
Our policies such as Make in India and PLI have signiﬁcantly increased manufacturing activities. We 
recognise that manufacturing presents huge potential for employment creation. We will make Bharat a 
trusted Global Manufacturing Hub through a series of programmes including simpliﬁcation of regulatory 
processes, investment in infrastructure to meet the requirements of manufacturing hubs, bringing 
capital to the industry and investing in research and development.
Increasing the Exports
We will promote Bharat's exports through international cooperation, infrastructure development and 
simpliﬁcation of laws
Revamp Commercial and Tax Legislations
We have substantially simpliﬁed the indirect and direct tax systems through simpler rules, new 
legislation, and use of technology. We are committed to launch an exercise to completely revamp our 
economic and commercial legislations to suit our economic needs. 
Honour Honest Taxpayers
We will honour honest taxpayers who have played an important role in strengthening our economy. 
41


42
In the last ten years we have made signiﬁcant progress in the manufacturing sector.  We launched 
a series of programmes like Make in India, PLI, and simpliﬁcation of compliances to expand 
manufacturing.  We will further harness the potential of manufacturing in creating employment 
opportunities and expanding economic activity. We believe that our talent in research and design 
can be best complimented by expanding the manufacturing sector. We also understand the need 
for self-reliance and resilience in global value chains. Therefore, we will make all efforts to develop 
Bharat as a Global Manufacturing Hub.
Global Manufacturing Hub
Under the Make in India programme, manufacturing has emerged as a major economic sector with good 
success in electronics, defence, mobile, automobiles and more. We will work towards making Bharat a 
global manufacturing hub and enhance employment in these crucial sectors.
Becoming Product Nation
We are a major engineering and design services hub in the world with many complex products being 
designed in Bharat. We will build on this strength to become a major Product Nation by combining our 
strength in product design services with manufacturing.
Developing Robust Industrial Infrastructure
Based on the principles of PM-Gatishakti, the government shall develop industrial cities in different 
industrial corridors for balanced regional development. This shall promote industrialisation of backward 
regions of the country.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
GLOBAL 
MANUFACTURING HUB
42


43
Balanced and Inclusive Development
We will launch an initiative to foster balanced regional development across all districts of the country. 
Brand, promotion and exports of One District One Product (ODOP) products will be encouraged under 
the initiative. 
Building a Globally Competitive Food Processing Industry
We will establish smart food processing hubs equipped with cutting-edge technologies to 
enable comprehensive monitoring of the entire food supply chain, from farm to table, ensuring 
quality, traceability and operational efficiency.
We will position Bharat as a major player in value chains of processed fruits, vegetables, ﬁsh, 
seafood and dairy, among others.
Focusing on Core Industries
We will focus on the technology and sustainability transition happening in steel, cement, metals, and 
engineering goods industries.  We will support these industries to adopt greener manufacturing 
processes.
Promoting Defence Manufacturing
We will vastly expand domestic defence manufacturing and exports of Made in Bharat defence 
equipment. This effort will be facilitated by accelerating indigenisation in major Air and Land Equipment 
Platforms.
Positioning Bharat as a Global Railway Manufacturing Hub
We will promote manufacturing, research, and development in the railway sector to make Bharat a 
leading global railway manufacturing hub.
Making Bharat as Global Aviation Manufacturing and MRO Hub
We will bring a commercial aircraft manufacturing ecosystem to Bharat. For this we will design 
a Policy for Aerospace Manufacturing in the country and try to develop our own passenger 
aircraft.
We will strengthen the civil aviation ecosystem by encouraging Maintenance, Repairs and 
Overhaul (MRO) activities as well as Aircraft Financing and Leasing Activities institutions 
through comprehensive government support programs under the Make in India initiative.
Promoting Ship Building
We will ensure availability of dedicated research, designing and testing facilities across the country to 
promote shipbuilding under the Make in India initiative.
Strengthening Bharat’s Position as Pharmacy of the World
We will strengthen Bharat’s position as the ‘Pharmacy of the World’ by boosting the 
manufacturing and research capacities of the pharmaceutical sector, especially APIs.
We will expand Research Linked Incentive schemes, encouraging companies to invest in 
research for new drugs, chemical entities and new biological entities.
Making Bharat a Global Electronics Manufacturing Hub by 2030
In the last ten years we have established a USD 100+ billion electronics manufacturing 
industry. We have already become the second largest mobile phone manufacturer in the world. 
Our policies have resulted in generating huge employment opportunities in this industry.
43


We will consolidate our efforts and expand electronics manufacturing three times to become a 
major player in the global value chain. We will leverage our design capabilities to develop 
indigenous brands.
Making Bharat a Major Player in Semiconductor and Chip Manufacturing
Building on our success of electronics industry,  will deepen our component ecosystem and take 
semiconductor design and manufacturing to a new level to become one of the global majors in chip 
manufacturing
Making Bharat a Global Leader in Automobile and EV Manufacturing
Bharat is a major automobile manufacturer.  We will support the growth of the automobile industry and 
its transition to EV manufacturing. We will invest in establishing a nationwide EV charger infrastructure 
to encourage EV adoption. 
Developing Rare Earths and Strategic Mineral Industry
We will support exploration for rare earths and strategic minerals.  We will develop partnerships with 
countries having reserves of these minerals to secure our supply chain.  We will support the processing 
industries and manufacture of ﬁnal products using rare earths and strategic minerals. 
Making Bharat a Global Leader in Textile Manufacturing
Bharat has been a leader in textiles, garments, and apparels. We recognise the huge 
employment generating potential of these industries. Therefore, we will accelerate the efforts 
made over the last ten years and take textile, garment, and apparel industries to the next 
level.
We will successfully operationalize PM Mitra parks, invest in research and development of new 
products, simplify the legal and compliance regimes, invest in common amenities, invest in 
infrastructure for textile industry, and launch special skilling programmes focussed on 
employment.
We will also make investments in our traditional textile industries to take our indigenous 
industries and designs to the global stage.
Lab Grown Diamonds
We will make India the largest producer for lab-grown diamond production, embracing 
cutting-edge technology and sustainable methods to drive economic growth and establish a 
leading position in the international market.
Setting Up Bio-Manufacturing Hubs
For fostering high-performance biomanufacturing towards promoting a circular economy for green, 
clean and prosperous Bharat by setting up of Bio-Manufacturing Hubs.
44


45
We have transformed infrastructure in the past ten years in terms of quality, quantity and reach. 
Every region of the country is experiencing the beneﬁts of our efforts. We will continue these efforts 
so that our citizens can realise their full potential in life and livelihood.
Constructing New Tracks
We will expand the railway network to increase capacity for passenger as well as cargo transportation. 
We have constructed 31,000 km railway tracks in the last ten years. We are now adding 5000+ km of new 
tracks every year and will continue to add new tracks at this pace for the next few years.
Increasing Ticket Availability
We will signiﬁcantly increase passenger carrying capacity by 2030 to signiﬁcantly reduce the waiting list.
Expansion of Kavach Train Protection System
We have indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection System Kavach and are rapidly expanding 
its coverage. In the next few years, we will expand the manufacturing, design and installation of Kavach 
Systems in a mission mode just as we electriﬁed the railway network.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
WORLD-CLASS
INFRASTRUCTURE
Providing Best in Class Experience in Railways
45


Building World Class Station
We have already started redevelopment of 1,300+ railway stations to world class standards. We will 
expand this project to all other major and medium sized stations.
 Expanding Coverage of New Age Trains
We have developed and manufactured world class Vande Bharat, Amrit Bharat and Namo Bharat trains. 
We will further expand this network of new age trains.
Vande Sleeper Trains
We will launch Vande Sleeper trains for a comfortable overnight journey.
High Frequency Trains for Regional Connectivity
We have commissioned sections of RRTS between Delhi and Meerut. We will further expand these 
services and launch other regional connectivity programmes to other major cities to ensure robust 
connectivity and integrate the regional economies.
Expanding Metro Network
We have initiated metro in 20+ cities over the past decade, we will expand the metro network in major 
urban centres ensuring last mile connectivity.
Expanding Bullet Trains
We are constructing the ﬁrst Bullet Train corridor in the country. Using the experience gained so far, we 
will initiate feasibility studies for Bullet Train Corridors in North, South and East India.
Launch User Friendly Super App
We will launch a Super App to provide all trains related services to users in a single app.
46


47
World-Class Road Network
Expanding PM Gram Sadak Yojana
We will extend the PM Gram Sadak Yojana to the remotest areas where there are settlements to ensure 
improved connectivity and access to healthcare, education, government services and markets.
Further Enhancing Road Safety
We will focus on further improving safety on roads through a series of techno legal interventions, 
training and behavioural change to improve road safety.
Expanding Expressways and ring roads
We will strengthen the modern road connectivity ecosystem to 15,000 km of access-controlled 
highways. We will construct ring roads around major cities to improve mobility and decongest cities.
Promoting EVs
We have successfully facilitated the induction of over 30 lakh EVs, currently operational on our roads. We 
will increase the ﬂeets of EVs and will also establish EV charging stations.
47


Developing Airports for Seamless Connectivity
We will enhance air connectivity multifold by development and operationalization of new airports, 
helipads and aerodromes.
Ensuring the Modernisation of Airports
We will transform airports into multi-modal hubs with integrated transit facilities such as buses, metro 
and rapid rail among others by effective use of PM Gatishakti National Master Plan.
Expansion of International Airports
In line with our vision for enhanced connectivity and economic growth, we will expand the number of 
international airports.
Formulating a Master Plan for Airport Transformation
We will introduce the Amrit Kaal Civil Aviation Master Plan to transform our airports into regional 
international hubs, providing single-point connectivity to designated regions worldwide, with the vision 
to position Bharat as the leading aviation ecosystem of South Asia.
Strengthening Waterways and Shipping
Enhancing the Capacity of Inland Waterways
We will integrate inter-ministry initiatives like the National Waterway Project, Namami Gange, the 
National River Conservation Plan, Jal Marg Vikas Project and Arth Ganga, among others, to double the 
share of Inland Water Transport in transportation.
Expanding Water Metro
We will expand water metro services across all feasible regions, enhancing water-based public 
transportation networks and improving connectivity.
Building a Homegrown Shipping Industry
We will revamp the legal framework to enable faster growth of our Shipping industry to become globally 
competitive.
Digital Infrastructure
Facilitating Digital Revolution by 6G
We will expand the 5G networks and take the lead in the development of 6G technology.
Expanding Bharat Net
We have connected over 2 lakh Gram Panchayats with BharatNet. We will expand BharatNet to every 
village with broadband, making high-speed internet accessible to all.
Land Records Digitization
We will implement next generation ‘Land Record Digitization’ and the integration of various institutions 
like Revenue Courts and Registration Offices.
Strengthening Aviation Sector
48


49
Energy Security
Ensuring Energy Independence by 2047
We will achieve energy independence for Bharat by 2047 and reduce petroleum imports through a mix of 
electric mobility, network of charging stations, renewable energy production and improving energy 
efficiency.
Implementing PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana
We will enable homes across Bharat to run devices like Electric Stoves, Fan, AC, TV among others and also 
enable EV charging through solar energy. 
Increasing Ethanol Mix for Dual Beneﬁts
We have achieved record ethanol blending under the Ethanol Blended Petrol Programme. We will further 
increase ethanol blending in petrol to mitigate environmental degradation while providing additional 
income to farmers.
Expanding Nuclear Energy
We will expand the nuclear energy component of Bharat’s energy mix through a focus on developing 
small modular reactors as well as increased investment in nuclear energy production.
Accelerating Bharat's Renewable Energy Transition
We will harness Bharat’s renewable energy potential, targeting 500 GW of renewable energy through 
the establishment of mega solar parks, wind parks and the Green Energy Corridor project among others.
Developing Battery Energy Storage System Infrastructure
We will incentivise private sector investment in large-scale Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS) 
infrastructure for fostering renewable energy integration, grid stability and resilience, ensuring a 
sustainable and reliable energy future for all.
Increasing Green Hydrogen Production Capacity
With a clear focus on green hydrogen, we will invest in expanding production, developing technologies 
and aim to become a major green hydrogen production hub.
Establishing Smart Grid
We will establish nationwide smart grids integrated with advanced technology, including smart meters 
and control centres, for efficient and intelligent energy management.
Global Manufacturing Hub in Renewable Energy
We will set up a Centre of Excellence for clean energy technologies and position the country as Global 
Manufacturing Hub for Wind, Solar and Green Hydrogen and scale up Bio-Energy Manufacturing facilities 
from all sorts of waste.
49


Our vision is to provide a world-class infrastructure in all cities and promote sustainable living.
Promoting Affordable Housing
We will strengthen the RERA act which has helped make the real estate sector in Bharat more 
transparent and citizen friendly than ever before. Further, we will facilitate home ownership for 
middle-income families through comprehensive measures including cost reduction in construction and 
registration, regulatory reforms like enabling automatic approvals for standard housing designs and 
promoting mixed-use housing.
New Satellite Townships
We will encourage the creation of new satellite townships near metro cities across India through a 
combination of reforms and policy initiatives. We will encourage mixed use and transit oriented 
development through the same.
Expanding Piped Natural Gas Connections
We have provided piped gas connections to around 1.1 crore households nationwide. We will further 
expand this programme to all major cities and towns.
Ensuring Ease of Mobility
We will create uniﬁed metropolitan transport systems that integrate multi-modal transport facilities 
and reduce commute time in cities. We will implement AI technologies for traffic management and 
transport efficiency.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
EASE OF LIVING IN
CITIES
50


51
Expanding Fleet of PM-eBus
We have launched a scheme PM-eBus Seva to introduce a ﬂeet of e-Buss across cities to provide 
affordable and safe transport to citizens. Now we will further extend it to other eligible cities.
Developing Water-Secure Cities
We will create water-secure cities, leveraging best practices for wastewater treatment, aquifer recharge 
and smart metering for bulk consumers.
Promoting Cooperative Urban Governance
We will begin long-term infrastructure projects with centre-state-city partnerships with a vision to 
revitalise our urban landscapes and enhance the quality of life for our citizens.
Developing Sustainable Cities
We will develop more green spaces like parks, playgrounds etc., reviving water bodies and developing 
natural spaces to make cities more adaptable, sustainable and people-friendly.
Open Landﬁll Free Cities
We will continue eliminating open landﬁlls to manage all kinds of waste being produced in Bharat 
through ‘Waste to Wealth Mission’.
Strengthening the Urban Land Record Systems
We will undertake the creation of the Digital Urban Land Records System. 
Encouraging Modern Regulatory Framework
We will work with state governments and cities to encourage them to create a modern set of legislation, 
by-laws and urban planning processes using technology. 
Global Conference and Exhibition Hubs
We will create big convention centres across cities and make Bharat into a global destination for 
conferences and exhibitions.
Urban Governance Curriculum
To ensure all round development of cities, we will create a fresh curriculum to teach urban ﬁnance, urban 
infrastructure, urban environmental protection, urban water management, urban transport and more.
51


52
Our vision of Virasat bhi, Vikas bhi is to shape a future where our traditions inspire and 
unite people across the world.
Developing Our Religious and Cultural Sites
We will undertake signiﬁcant new projects to develop religious and tourist sites inspired by the Kashi 
Vishwanath corridor model, across the length and breadth of our country.
Holistic Development of Ayodhya
As millions of devotees from around the world visit Shri Ram Lalla in Ayodhya, we are committed to the 
holistic development of the city.
Continue the Preservation and Study of Bharatiya Manuscripts
We will continue to digitise all Bharatiya manuscripts and epigraphs in mission mode. We will establish a 
dedicated scholarship programme to research ancient Bharatiya manuscripts and epigraphs.
Establishing Bharatiya Sanskriti Kosh
We will establish the Bharatiya Sanskriti Kosh to ensure the preservation and protection of ancient 
Bharatiya civilization, classical languages, culture, and traditions through the extensive use of 
technology.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
VIRASAT BHI,
VIKAS BHI
52


53
Expediting the establishment of युगे युगीन (Yuge Yugeen) Bharat National Museum
We will expedite the construction of the Yuge Yugeen Bharat National Museum, featuring millenia of 
Bharatiya history and work towards making it one of the most liked museums in the world.
Developing Legal Standards For Cultural IP Protection
We will collaborate with domestic and international organizations like WIPO & UNESCO to develop 
harmonised legal standards for cultural IP protection.
Translating Bharatiya Literary Works into Foreign Languages
We will support the translation and adaptation of ancient Bhartiya literary works into foreign languages.
International Conclave on Bharatiya Knowledge Traditions
We will organise a Triennial International Conclave on Bharatiya Knowledge Traditions.
Developing ASI Monuments
We will restore and preserve culturally important Archaeological Survey of India Monuments, re-igniting 
our rich heritage for the 21st century.
Strengthen Swadesh Darshan Programme
We have launched a Swadesh Darshan programme for comprehensive development of tourist 
destinations.  We will work with state governments to implement and further strengthen this 
programme. We will include destinations and circuits covering the life and travels of important saints 
and philosophers.
Developing Thematic Circuits for promoting cultural experience
For Border Villages to experience their lifestyle and culture
Sustainable ecotourism in select under-explored regions spread across Bharat.
Riverine Tourism along all major river ecosystems of Bharat.
Island tourism hubs in Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Adventure Tourism in the North East and other Hill States.
Promoting ‘Wed In India’
We will promote select destinations across Bharat as preferred venues to showcase the richness of 
Bharatiya weddings, highlighting the vibrant traditions, and supporting cultural exchanges.
53


‘Reform, Perform, Transform’ is our mantra for Good Governance. We have used a mix of 
policies, technology, and simpler processes to ensure good governance in the last ten years. 
These initiatives have made the governance more efficient and have reduced corruption at all 
levels of governance from the top to everyday transactions carried out by citizens. Our Vision 
for good governance is to further simplify the processes, procedures, rules and regulations in 
such a way that we are able to take the government out of the everyday lives of normal 
citizens. We will undertake more institutional reforms and simplify processes using 
technology to ensure that citizen-government interaction is signiﬁcantly improved.
Combating Corruption
In contrast with the previous government, we have given  transparent and accountable governance to 
our citizens. We will continue our ﬁght against corruption through strict implementation of laws and use 
of technology.
Bringing Uniform Civil Code
Article 44 of the Constitution lists Uniform Civil Code as one of the Directive Principles of State Policy. 
[MASKED] believes that there cannot be gender equality till such time Bharat adopts a Uniform Civil Code, 
which protects the rights of all women, and the [MASKED] reiterates its stand to draw a Uniform Civil Code, 
drawing upon the best traditions and harmonising them with the modern times.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
GOOD GOVERNANCE
Institutional Reforms
54


Electoral Reforms
Employees and Police Personnel Welfare
Fiscal Autonomy of Panchayati Raj Institutions
We will take further steps to facilitate ﬁscal autonomy and sustainability of Panchayati Raj Institutions.
Formulating a National Litigation Policy
We will formulate a National Litigation Policy to expedite the resolution of all matters in courts, lower 
the cost of contested court proceedings, and decrease the number of cases in which the government is 
a party and the consequent load on the courts.
Initiating Reforms in the Civil Procedures
We will completely overhaul the commercial and civil justice systems, on the lines of criminal justice 
reforms. This revamp will aim to streamline procedures, enhance the efficiency of legal processes and 
ensure timely justice, fostering a more business-friendly and citizen-centric legal environment.
Improving Delivery of Public Services
We will improve public services delivery through  CSCs and Post Offices using technology. We will use 
Bhashini to provide services in multiple Indian languages. We will increase participation of citizens in 
policy making through platforms like MyGov.
Strengthen Statistical Institutions
We will further strengthen the capacity of statistical institutions to give an impetus to data driven policy 
making.
            Making One Nation, One Election a Reality
We have set up a High Powered Committee to examine the issues of conducting simultaneous elections 
and will work towards the implementation of the recommendations of the Committee.
            Introducing Common Electoral Roll
We will make provisions for a common Electoral Roll for all levels of elections.
Capacity Building for All Central Government Employees
We will expand the Karmyogi Scheme to cover all Central Government employees, promoting a 
responsive, highly competent and tech-savvy workforce for efficient and inclusive governance.
Modernising Police Forces
We will assist states in transforming the police into a tech-savvy, tech-trained and tech-equipped force 
through the Police Modernization Scheme.
55


56
Accelerating e-Courts on Mission Mode
We will accelerate the e-Courts Mission Mode Project to complete the digitisation of entire court records 
and for easy access to court proceedings online.
Expedite the Resolution of Old Cases
We will establish fast track courts for quick disposal of pendency in identiﬁed areas.
Creation of Ecosystem for Alternate Dispute Resolution
We will work towards further improving the legal framework to promote arbitration and mediation 
ecosystem.
Judicial Reforms
56


57
We have taken many successful steps in the last ten years to expand and improve health 
services. We have focused on yoga, ﬁtness, clean air, pure water and nutritious food for the 
overall well being of our citizens. We developed vaccines to ﬁght the pandemic. The Ministry 
of AYUSH was created to promote traditional medicine. Opened new medical colleges to 
increase the number of doctors. Medical care was provided to every person through AIIMS 
and Ayushman Arogya Mandir. Free medical treatment up to Rs 5 lakh provided by Ayushman 
Bharat. And used technology extensively in every ﬁeld. Modi's guarantee is to further 
increase these efforts for a healthy India.
Strengthening AIIMS
We have established 15 AIIMS in the past decade to provide affordable and quality healthcare for all. We 
will strengthen our network of AIIMS to provide quality healthcare across the country.
Increasing Seats In Medical Education
Through the increased number of AIIMS and various medical colleges, we will increase the number of UG 
and PG seats in medical education.
Strengthening PM ABHIM
We are already upgrading secondary and primary health care under PM-ABHIM (PM-Ayushman Bharat 
Health Infrastructure Mission). We will further expand PM-ABHIM for robust health care.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
SWASTHA BHARAT
57


Strengthening Ayushman Arogya Mandirs
We will further strengthen the Ayushman Arogya Mandirs and upgrade district hospitals and other 
secondary healthcare centres by expanding the full functionality of all packages for comprehensive 
healthcare.
Expanding Jan Aushadhi Kendras For Affordable Medicines
We will expand the Jan Aushadhi Kendra network to provide high-quality low-cost medicines to citizens 
across the country.
Launching an Emergency And Trauma Care Mission
We will launch an Emergency And Trauma Care Mission to provide immediate and effective care to 
trauma patients.
Strengthening The Ongoing Programmes For Disease Eradication
We will intensify existing efforts to ensure elimination of TB, Leprosy, Lymphatic Filariasis, Measles and 
Rubella, Trachoma, and Kala Azar by facilitating timely testing and access to medicines.
Accelerating Vaccine Production and Distribution
We will encourage and extend support to Bharatiya vaccine manufacturers and biopharma companies in 
various capacities to boost production and distribution and aim to reduce our timeline for vaccine 
manufacturing.
Augmenting the Health Human Resources
We will strengthen the efforts being made to increase the training capacity for paramedics, technicians, 
pharmacists and nurses.
Improving Mental Healthcare Services
In our increasingly complex society, mental well-being has emerged as a top priority.  We will strengthen 
our traditional means including Yoga and Meditation, and also enhance the scope and coverage of mental 
health initiatives like Manas and Manodarpan.
58


59
Our vision is to redeﬁne the education ecosystem by envisioning modern, universalised, quality 
education propelled by the momentum of NEP 2020.  We will prepare our students to be future ready 
through a dynamic curriculum process.  We will encourage teaching and learning in mother tongue.  
We will focus on all dimensions of quality education including teachers training, infrastructure, use of 
technology, internships, and time-to-time upgradation of knowledge and skills.
Establishing New Institutions of Higher Learning
7 IITs, 16 IIITs, 7 IIMs, 15 AIIMS, 315 Medical Colleges and 390 universities have been set-up in the past 
decade. We are committed to strengthening these institutes and further increasing the number of 
institutions of higher learning. We will continue to upgrade the existing institutions through focused 
funding, capacity building, infrastructure upgradation and dedicated research grants. 
           Using Technology for Access to Quality Education
We will promote the usage of education stack for personalised and ﬂexible learning 
management systems through initiatives under PM e-Vidya such as SWAYAM, SWAYAM PRABHA, 
etc.
Building on the success of the above digital learning initiatives, we will operationalize a digital 
university for industry-focused free courses to provide upskilling opportunities for low-income 
families. 
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
QUALITY
EDUCATION
59


Ensuring Quality School Education
We will ensure that every student gets the opportunity for high-quality school education. For this, we 
will strengthen the network of PM SHRI Schools, Ekalavya Schools and other such schools as per NEP to 
make them world-class.  We will work towards a 100% Gross Enrollment Ratio from pre-school to 
secondary level.
Ensuring Future-Ready Youth
We will make our youth future ready by adopting a dynamic learning curriculum at school level as 
mandated by NEP and by incorporating industry-aligned curriculum and skill development in emerging 
technologies in higher education.
Implementing One Nation, One Student ID
We will achieve 100% implementation of 'One Nation, One Student ID’ through the Automated 
Permanent Academic Account Registry (APAAR) to store academic qualiﬁcations, credit scores and 
certiﬁcates, among others for students from pre-primary to higher education.
Expanding Skills Training for Youth
In the last ten years, we have developed a robust skill development ecosystem.  In line with the 
objectives of NEP, we will further enhance it and integrate it with our education system.  We will 
continue to work with industry to expand skilling opportunities that lead to employment and 
self-employment.
60


Our vision is to strengthen the sports ecosystem for Bharat to be a world leader in 
Sports.
Facilitating Hosting Olympics
We will facilitate IOA to bid for hosting the 
Olympic Games in 2036, and develop sports 
infrastructure like stadiums and 
state-of-the-art training centres to host major 
international sporting events.
Providing Comprehensive Plan for 
Retired Sportspersons
We will launch a new programme for 
sportspersons, providing them with beneﬁts like 
educational opportunities, employment 
opportunities and promotion opportunities.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
SPORTS
DEVELOPMENT
61


Including More Traditional Sports Under Khelo India
We will include more traditional sports under the Khelo India Scheme.
Incentivising Sports Good Manufacturing
We will incentivize sports goods manufacturing in partnership with the sports ecosystem in Bharat to 
take forward the vision of Aatmanirbhar Bharat.
Universal Access to Sports Infrastructure
We will continue to expand the Khelo India network and other initiatives  to nurture future athletes who 
can represent our nation with pride.
Promote Sports Startups
We will promote startups in sports and help create a technology ecosystem in sports.
62


63
Maintaining Peace in Northeast
We will continue our efforts to address the issues in the disturbed areas and remove AFSPA in a phased 
manner. We will further work towards resolution of inter-state border disputes amongst Northeastern 
states through sustained efforts.
Leveraging Northeast as a Strategic Gateway for the Act East Policy
We will work to leverage the Northeast as a strategic gateway for Bharat's Act East Policy ensuring 
connectivity, education, health, economic development and security.
Building Sarovars to Manage Floods in North East
We will ensure ﬂood management in the Northeast by conducting advanced satellite imagery to identify 
places where big reservoirs can be constructed to store excess waters according to topography, which 
will be used for irrigation, organising water sports among others.
Formulating Master Plan For Purvodaya
We will formulate a dedicated Purvodaya Master Plan for targeted and integrated infrastructure 
development of eastern India.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
BALANCED REGIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT
Our vision for regional development is to ensure every part of India progresses equally, fostering 
growth and innovation.
63


Holistic Development of Islands
We will transform our islands into premier global tourism destinations by developing world-class beach 
resorts, marine adventure activities, and robust coastal infrastructure. Our focus will be on attracting 
tourists from Bharat and around the world while preserving the local ecosystems and promoting 
sustainable tourism practices.
Sustainable Development of Hill States
We will continue to protect and preserve the unique ecological balance of Bharat's hill states through 
sustainable development initiatives. We will work with state governments and local bodies to prepare a 
special master plan to maintain their pristine beauty and biodiversity, taking into account the local 
geography, culture and traditional practices, for the balanced development of hilly areas.
Resilient Infrastructure For Bharat’s Coast
We will continue to strengthen Bharat’s coastline by developing a resilient infrastructure. We will work 
with the state governments and local communities to prepare a master plan, keeping in mind the special 
needs of coastal areas and ensuring all facilities.
Combating Himalayan River Floods
We will partner with neighbouring countries to strategically manage the Himalayan rivers. Our focus will 
be on holistic measures to mitigate the devastating effects of ﬂoods and harnessing hydroelectric 
power to generate affordable electricity.
64
64


65
Our vision is for Bharat to be a champion in technological innovations by becoming the 
centre of cutting-edge research.
Positioning Bharat as Leading Space Power
We will launch Gaganyaan, Bharat’s ﬁrst human spaceﬂight mission, and land an astronaut on 
the Moon, a sign of Bharat’s progress and prosperity in Amrit Kaal.
We will establish Bharatiya Antariksha Station (BAS) and we will also operationalise a second 
launch complex for the country. 
We aim to signiﬁcantly increase the value of the Space Economy, positioning Bharat as a 
leading space power and extending support to Global South countries in utilising space and 
space technology services.
We will set up a Global Space Academy under the aegis of ISRO and IIST with fellowship 
programmes for both national and international students. We will also establish a spaceforum 
that positions Bharat as a leading space power and assist Global South countries in using 
space and space-tech services.
Operationalising Anusandhan National Research Foundation
We will operationalise the Anusandhan National Research Foundation to build robust Research and 
Development infrastructure across the country. 
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
TECHNOLOGY AND
INNOVATIONS
65


Scientiﬁc Research Fund
We will set up an Anusandhan Fund with an investment of ₹1 lakh crore to provide loans to promote 
scientiﬁc research.
Catalysing AI Innovation for Global Leadership
We will develop a comprehensive ecosystem under the IndiaAI mission, driving AI innovation through 
collaborative strategic programs and partnerships to position Bharat as a global leader in AI innovation 
and build domestic capacities to ensure tech sovereignty.
Graphene Mission
We will strengthen the Graphene-based technology programmes to develop more use cases and 
applications.
Quantum Tech Frontier
We will operationalise the National Quantum Mission to position Bharat as a global leader in quantum 
technology, harnessing its potential to revolutionise various sectors and spearhead technological 
innovation.
Achieving Geospatial Data Excellence
We will create a national geospatial data registry and geospatial data exchange that will enable 
industries and startups for innovative products and services. 
Establishing Science Parks
We will establish science parks in various cities, to ensure that the spirit of scientiﬁc inquiry is within 
reach of Bharat’s youth.
Launching National Atmospheric Mission
We will launch a National Atmospheric Mission to be called Mausam to make Bharat “weather ready” and 
“climate smart”. 
66


World has noticed the concept of LIFE, Lifestyle for Environment, given by Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi. This vision is complemented by focussed execution of all 
dimensions of environment management.  We stand committed to lead the world in 
sustainable living. We will use both traditional wisdom as well as modern practices to 
contribute to a healthier planet.
Increasing non-fossil fuel capacity
Due to our focus on the environment, we have reached 44% of our electricity generation capacity from 
non-fossil fuel sources.  We will continue on this path and increase the share of non-fossil fuel sources in 
line with Panchamrit.  We will work towards achieving net zero emissions by 2070.
Revitalising Bharat’s Rivers
Building on the experience of Namami Gange, we will undertake phase wise improvement of 
health and cleanliness of all major rivers.
By leveraging traditional knowledge alongside modern techniques, we will integrate check 
dam construction, Amrit Sarovar construction, and basin management into the National River 
Conservation Plan. Through this, the conservation and regeneration of basins of all major 
rivers will be accelerated.
We will support state governments in developing systems to treat water contaminated with 
arsenic, mercury, industrial pollutants, or other naturally occurring issues, ensuring 
comprehensive water quality management.
MODI KI 
GUARANTEE FOR
SUSTAINABLE
BHARAT
67


68
Improving Air Quality
We have initiated the National Clean Air Program framework, aimed at reducing air pollution across 131 
cities. Further, we will ensure that the NCAP effectively achieves and maintains the designated annual 
average ambient air quality standards in all regions of the nation, especially achieving National Air 
Quality Standards in 60 Cities by 2029.
Promoting Afforestation and Agroforestry
We are committed to achieving the target of a carbon sink by enhancing the tree cover.
We will launch the Green Aravalli Project, a green corridor to protect and preserve biodiversity 
in the region and combat desertiﬁcation.
Protecting Himalayan Ecology
Considering the fragile nature of the Himalayan ecology and the increase in the frequency and intensity 
of natural disasters in the region, we will undertake a holistic approach towards disaster mitigation and 
strengthening of disaster resilience in the Himalayan States.
Developing Coastal Climate Resilience
We will safeguard our coastal communities and ecosystems by building resilience against climate change 
and its threats. 
Expanding Green Credit Programme
We will continue our lead in the Green Credit Programme by expanding the scope of activities to fulﬁl 
the decarbonization requirements.    
68


69
Achieving Disaster-Resilient Bharat
We will strive to achieve a disaster-resilient Bharat with minimum casualties and losses due to natural 
disasters by evolving appropriate technical and policy initiatives.
Managing Human-Animal Conﬂict
We will work with state governments and all stakeholders to sensitively manage human-animal conﬂict 
in areas close to forests.
Initiating National E-Waste Management Programme
We will launch a series of programmes to address the growing concern over safe disposal of e-waste.
Promoting Sustainable Living
We will strengthen Mission LIFE, establishing a comprehensive repository encompassing both traditional 
and contemporary best practices, and fostering the global adoption of environmentally friendly 
lifestyles to promote sustainable living across the globe.
Promoting Recycling
We will promote recycling programmes across the country. We will institutionalise recycling mandates 
across sectors to maximise mineral recovery from used products.
Protect the Environment through Various Schemes
We have started multiple programmes to protect the environment like PM Surya Ghar Yojana, Railway 
Electriﬁcation, PM e-Bus, promotion of EVs, Ethanol and Bio-fuel promotion among others. Through 
these programmes, our citizens will beneﬁt from the opportunity to live in a clean environment.
69


NOTES


71
NOTES


72




