[MASKED]
DELIVER
WILL
MANIFESTO  
LOK SABHA ELECTIONS 2019
INDIAN NATIONAL [MASKED]


Contents
Foreword by Rahul Gandhi
Every single word in the [MASKED] 
manifesto reﬂects your voices and 
the aspirations of crores of Indians.
The choice before you
The 2019 elections are crucial  
for India’s future and our  
children’s future.
pg 4
pg 6
“I’ve never broken a promise that I’ve made.”
Rahul Gandhi


Appeal
Let us rebuild India. Together,  
let us get India moving again.
Detailed plan of action
Kaam, Daam, Shaan, Sushashan, Swabhimaan, Samman.
KAAM—EMPLOYMENT AND GROWTH 
Jobs
Industry
Infrastructure
Cities, Urbanisation and Urban Policy
Rural Development
Informal and Unorganised Sector
DAAM—AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS  
FOR ALL
Agriculture, Farmers and Farm Labour
Economic Policy
Minimum Income Support Programme  
or Nyuntam Aay Yojana (NYAY)
Taxation and Tax Reforms
Banking and Financial Sector
Science, Technology and Innovation
Fisheries and Fisherfolk
SHAAN—PRIDE IN OUR HARD  
AND SOFT POWER
National Security
Internal Security
Foreign Policy
Border Security
Ex-Servicemen
Central Armed Police Forces
Art, Culture and Heritage
Tourism
Non-Resident Indians
Engaging With Citizens and Civil Society
SUSHASAN—GOOD GOVERNANCE  
THROUGH INDEPENDENT AND  
ACCOUNTABLE INSTITUTIONS
Institutions
Anti-Corruption
Governance, Transparency and Accountability
Federalism and Centre-State Relations
10
11
12
13
13
14
14
15
 
16
17
19
 
20
22
23
23
24
 
25
25
26
27
27
28
28
29
29
30
31
32
32
32
33
pg
33
34
35
36
36
37
37
38
39
39
40
41
42
43
43
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
49
50
51
52
52
Local Self Governments
Judiciary
Review of Laws, Rules and Regulations
Electoral Reforms
Police Reforms
Media and Freedom of The Media
Perspective Planning and The New Planning  
Commission
SWABHIMAAN—SELF-ESTEEM FOR THE DEPRIVED
Women’s Empowerment and Gender Justice
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other  
Backward Classes
Jammu & Kashmir
North Eastern States
Religious and Linguistic Minorities
Denotiﬁed Tribes and Semi-Nomadic Tribes
Senior Citizens
Persons with Disabilities
Rights of LGBTQIA+
SAMMAN—A LIFE OF DIGNITY FOR ALL
Healthcare
Education
Food and Nutrition Security
Child Welfare
Water Management, Sanitation and Hygiene
Environment and Climate Change
Climate Resilience and Disaster Management
Digital Rights of Every Citizen
Sports
pg 53
pg 9


121
24
PUBLIC  
CONSULTATIONS
12
COUNTRIES FROM WHERE 
NRIs WERE REPRESENTED
STATES AND 3 UNION  
TERRITORIES IN OVER  
60 LOCATIONS
53
SESSIONS WITH  
FARMERS, TEACHERS,  
ENTREPRENEURS,  
DOCTORS, LAWYERS 
AND ECONOMISTS
Foreword by 
Rahul 
Gandhi
Foreword by Rahul Gandhi  /  4


Elections 2019 present a stark choice to the people 
of India.
 
Will India be a free and democratic country and will 
the Indian people be free from fear, free to live and 
work and pray and eat and love and marry according 
to their wishes, free from poverty and free to pursue 
their ambitions? Or will India be governed by a perni-
cious ideology that will trample upon people’s rights, 
institutions, conventions and the healthy differences 
that are the essence of a multi-cultural country?
 
Will India be able to lift all our people with the tide 
of growth and will it get rid of poverty or will India 
become a country marked by gross inequalities of 
income, wealth and power?
 
The last 5 years have been disastrous for the people 
of India. Youth have lost jobs. Farmers have lost 
hope. Traders have lost business. Micro, small and 
medium enterprises have lost their conﬁdence.  
Women have lost a sense of security. Deprived  
communities have lost their traditional rights.  
Institutions have lost independence.
 
The harshest blow is that our citizens have lost 
their faith in the words of the Prime Minister and 
his Government. He has given us only grandiose 
promises, empty slogans, failed programmes, false 
statistics and an overall climate of fear, intimidation 
and hatred.
 
In this time of deep crisis, the Indian National  
[MASKED] promises a clean break from the past  
5 years. With this manifesto, the [MASKED] offers to 
you the only national alternative: a distinct alterna-
tive that is unwavering in its commitment to truth, 
freedom, dignity, self-respect and prosperity for our 
people. We promise to make India strong and united, 
and a just and prosperous society.
Our manifesto process reﬂects our commitment to  
a higher vision, that of listening to the Jan Awaaz.  
It is not the ‘mann ki baat’ of one individual but  
the collective voice of lakhs of people.
 
We have used all possible tools—website, WhatsApp, 
email, online petitions, and meetings with citizens, 
experts, stakeholders and grassroots activists.  
Between October 2018 and February 2019, many  
of you engaged in a conversation with the [MASKED],  
in at least 16 languages, through the medium most 
easily available to you. Our Manifesto Committee 
organised 121 consultations with the public and  
53 consultations with experts such as farmers, entre-
preneurs, economists, students, teachers, women’s 
groups, doctors, lawyers and many others. We held 
consultations in over 60 locations across 24 States 
and 3 Union Territories. We also met with NRI repre-
sentatives from over 12 countries.
 
I have personally been listening to our people’s  
voices from all corners of our country. Every single 
word in the [MASKED] manifesto reﬂects your  
voices and the aspirations of crores of Indians.  
It is an action plan for the future of India. You  
inspired this manifesto. It is a living manifesto.  
Now, it needs your support and your vote.
 
We will present a report to the people of India, every 
year, on the status of implementation of our mani-
festo. We will also set up an independent social audit 
group, which will make its own assessment of how 
and to what extent we have fulﬁlled our promises.
This is our commitment.  
[MASKED] promises.  
[MASKED] delivers.
Foreword by Rahul Gandhi  /  5
Rahul Gandhi 
President, Indian National [MASKED]


The Choice 
Before 
You
The 2019 general elections will be held during 
Mahatma Gandhi’s 150th birth anniversary year. This 
reminds us that these elections are mainly between 
2 ideologies. On the one hand is the Indian National 
[MASKED] which has worked tirelessly to “wipe every 
tear from every eye,” while building a strong, har-
monious, prosperous and modern India. On the other 
hand is the ideology of the RSS and its afﬁliates, 
which is working to destroy the very idea of India 
that the Mahatma gave his life for.
 
Over the last 5 years of the [MASKED] government, India 
has suffered under the ‘Modi model,’ which has 
devastated our economy, impoverished our farmers, 
destroyed jobs, divided communities, stoked hatred 
and spread fear. It is a model that has stripped the 
average Indian of dignity, voice and trust. This is not 
the model India deserves. This is a model that all 
Indians must reject.
 
The [MASKED] model is in stark contrast to the [MASKED] 
model. The [MASKED] has always provided transfor-
mative development, inclusive growth, responsive 
governance and reforms that strengthen the  
foundations of our Republic.
 
The 2019 elections are crucial for India’s future and 
our children’s future. The choices before our citizens 
are crystal clear.
 
Do we choose freedom or fear?
Do we choose harmony or hatred?
Do we choose inclusion or exclusion?
Do we choose dignity or oppression? 
Do we choose prosperity for all or wealth for a few?
Do we choose results or jumlas?
Do we choose justice or injustice?
 
Our allies and other progressive political parties 
across the country recognise the importance of  
this moment. We have, therefore, come together  
to defeat the [MASKED]-led coalition and set our nation  
on the right course. In this Manifesto, we present  
to you the only national alternative—the Indian 
National [MASKED].
Foreword by Rahul Gandhi  /  6


Why [MASKED] Again?
Our record speaks for itself. We have delivered  
prosperity for the people of India before. We will  
do it again!
 
Ahead of us lies an electoral battle that will decide 
the fate of our nation for decades to come. India has 
faced many such grave challenges before. The Indian 
National [MASKED] has been at the forefront of many 
such battles, and India has always triumphed.
 
[MASKED] led and won India’s struggle for freedom. 
We established and nurtured parliamentary democra-
cy. We led India to adopt a visionary Constitution that 
ushered in peaceful socio-economic transformation, 
established institutions that safeguarded our Repub-
lic, and provided the nation its moral compass that 
has stood the test of time. On the other hand, under 
the [MASKED] government, every independent institution 
has suffered an unprecedented loss of credibility. 
[MASKED] will restore India’s faith in our institutions 
and Constitution. We have done it before. We will  
do it again!
 
[MASKED] built a modern India marked by prosper-
ity and productivity. We built the IITs, IIMs, AIIMSs, 
CSIR institutions and laboratories, and educational 
and scientiﬁc research institutions that harnessed 
the brilliance of Indian minds and talent. [MASKED] 
ushered in the Green Revolution and the White Rev-
olution that transformed lives in rural India. We built 
the public sector that was the foundation upon which 
industrialisation and technological progress reached 
commanding heights. We made India a nuclear and 
space power. We led the Electronics and Telecom 
Revolutions and made India a global leader in Infor-
mation Technology. 
 
On the other hand, the [MASKED] government has ensured 
that farm prices are at a 10-year low, credit growth 
is at a 20-year low and unemployment is at a  
 
45-year high. Exports and investment are at histor-
ical lows, projects are stalling at an increasing rate, 
and factory closures have led to a stagnating manu-
facturing sector. Digital India, Startup India and Make 
in India have been colossal failures. Petrol, diesel 
and gas prices have sky-rocketed. Consumers are in 
despair and have lost conﬁdence in the government. 
Farmers are under extreme stress and have lost 
hope. An aspirational India has become a desperate 
India. [MASKED] will once again bring India on track  
to be among the leading economies of the world in 
the 21st Century. We have delivered before. We will 
do it again!
 
[MASKED] launched liberalisation and economic  
reforms. It is the [MASKED] that created India’s 
successful middle class and the new entrepreneurial 
class. It is the [MASKED] that passed rights-based  
legislation and created a social safety net for the 
very poor. It is the [MASKED]-led [MASKED] government  
that lifted an unprecedented 14 crore Indians out  
of poverty between 2004 and 2014.
 
On the other hand, Mr. Modi, arbitrarily and single- 
handedly, devastated India’s economy through  
demonetisation. It cost the people of India at least  
Rs. 4 lakh crores in lost output, lakhs of jobs and 
greater indebtedness. Then, a poorly designed GST 
was implemented in a hasty and careless manner, 
with rules being changed haphazardly almost every 
day. Arbitrary powers given to authorities brought 
back the ‘Inspector Raj.’ Tax terrorism has crushed 
the animal spirits of our entrepreneurs. Together, 
these moves have destroyed the lives and livelihoods 
of farmers, traders, small business owners and work-
ers in the unorganised sector. [MASKED] will ensure 
that the excesses and mistakes of the past 5 years 
are reversed. We will usher in an economy that works 
for all and we will ensure that no one is left behind. 
We have delivered before. We will do it again!
Inspired by the slogan ‘Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan,’ the 
[MASKED] government led India to victory in the 1965 
war with Pakistan. In 1971, we decisively defeat-
ed Pakistan and liberated Bangladesh. We crushed 
secessionist forces, healed differences, and ensured 
the unity and integration of our people. [MASKED] 
leaders Mahatma Gandhi, Smt. Indira Gandhi, Shri 
Rajiv Gandhi and Shri Beant Singh made the ultimate 
sacriﬁce for India.
 
On the other hand, the [MASKED] Government’s policies 
have been based on the whim of one man, sidelining 
the Ministry of External Affairs and the entire diplo-
matic corps. The [MASKED] Government is solely respon-
sible for cancelling the gains made under the [MASKED] 
years, the widening of fault lines, the total alienation 
of the people of Jammu & Kashmir, and a worsening 
of the security situation in that State. Pseudo-na-
tionalism is on the rise and the success of the armed 
forces is politicised. The [MASKED] Government’s political 
boasts have come even as the defence budget, as 
a percentage of GDP, has been reduced to its low-
est levels in 50 years. The [MASKED] will once again 
restore the pride of our armed forces, insulate them 
from politics, entrust the conduct of foreign policy  
to professional diplomats and strengthen India’s  
hard power.
We have delivered before. We will do it again!
The Choice Before You  /  7


Do we choose inclusion or exclusion? 
Do we choose prosperity for all  
or wealth for a few?
Do we choose results or jumlas?
Do we choose justice or injustice?
The Choice Before You  /  8


Detailed 
Plan of 
Action 
9


Our pledge is jobs, jobs, jobs. [MASKED] will ﬁll all 4 lakh Central 
Government and institutional vacancies before March 2020, create an 
estimated 10 lakh seva mitra positions in every gram panchayat and urban 
local body, launch a ‘Water Bodies Restoration Mission’ and ‘Wasteland 
Regeneration Mission’ to create 1 crore jobs, exempt new businesses  
from applicable laws and regulations (except Minimum Wages Act and  
tax laws) for a period of 3 years, encourage State Governments to ﬁll their 
vacancies, reward businesses for job creation, provide businesses with 
ﬁscal incentives for employing more women, and require businesses with 
over 100 employees to start an apprenticeship programme.
Kaam— 
Employment 
and  
Growth
10


01
Jobs
Unemployment is the gravest challenge to the country and job creation is the highest priority 
for the economy. In the last 5 years, there has been a dramatic rise in unemployment. Today, 
unemployment is touching a 45-year high of 6.1 per cent according to the government’s own 
ﬁgures. The Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy puts the number at 7.2 per cent. At the 
end of this February, 3.1 crore people were actively looking for jobs. Data indicates that total 
employment has declined, the labour participation rate has declined and existing jobs have 
been destroyed. Every section of society has been affected by growing unemployment and the 
destruction of existing jobs: youth, families, women, small business persons, traders, farmers, 
daily-wage workers and agricultural labourers. 
01. [MASKED] pledges to give the highest priority  
to protecting existing jobs and creating new jobs. 
02. In order to underline the link between the growth 
of the industry and services sectors and rapid cre-
ation of jobs, [MASKED] will create a new Ministry 
of Industry, Services and Employment.
03. All of the 4 lakh vacancies as on 1 April 2019 
in the Central Government, Central Public Sector 
Enterprises, Judiciary and Parliament will be ﬁlled 
before the end of March 2020. As a condition for 
devolution of funds to the healthcare and educa-
tion sectors and to Panchayats and Municipalities, 
[MASKED] will request State Governments to ﬁll all 
vacancies, estimated at 20 lakh, in the 2 sectors 
and in local bodies. 
04. We will work with State Governments to create 
new Seva Mitra positions (estimated at 10 lakh) 
in every Gram Panchayat and every Urban Local 
Body to ensure the effective delivery of govern-
ment services to citizens.
05. Application fees for government examinations 
and government posts will be abolished.
06. [MASKED] pledges to create lakhs of new jobs for 
qualiﬁed teachers, doctors, nurses, paramedics, 
technicians, instructors and administrators through 
a massive expansion of the education and 
health sectors.
07. Para-state workers such as Anganwadi workers, 
ASHA workers, rozgarsahayaks, preraks, and anude-
shaks, form the backbone of the public service 
delivery system. We will increase funding for the 
relevant programmes and work with State Govern-
ments to ensure that all arrears are paid imme-
diately. We will also work with State Governments 
and attempt to address all pending contentious 
issues regarding their salaries and work conditions. 
In addition, we will expand the ASHA programme 
and appoint a second ASHA worker in all villages 
with a population exceeding 2500 persons.
08. We will trigger rapid growth of the manufac-
turing sector, particularly of MSMEs, through the 
provision of world-class infrastructure in industrial 
hubs and cluster towns in order to aid the expan-
sion of current units and the creation of new units.
09. MSMEs account for 90 per cent of all employment 
outside agriculture. The deﬁnition of MSMEs based 
on capital employed is biased against labour. 
[MASKED] will link the deﬁnition of MSME to 
employment. A business employing 10 persons  
or less will be ‘micro;’ between 11 and 100 will  
be ‘small;’ and between 101 and 500 will be 
‘medium.’
10. We will create an Enterprise Support Agency 
to help entrepreneurs, including start-ups, with 
all-round business support including counselling, 
incubation, access to technology, funding, domestic 
and export markets, and the creation of new prod-
ucts, services and intellectual property.
11. We promise regulatory forbearance for Micro  
and Small Enterprises. They will be exempt from 
all applicable laws and regulations (except the 
Minimum Wages Act and tax laws) for a period  
of 3 years from 1 April 2019 or, in the case of  
new businesses, the date of commencement of 
business. This means freedom from ‘Inspector Raj’ 
until they stabilise. 
12. [MASKED] will promote ‘Mass Entrepreneurship’ 
and support entrepreneurs to replicate tried and 
tested models of businesses in order to meet the 
growing demand for such goods and services.
13. The main job-creating sectors are construction, 
textiles, leather, gems & jewellery, entertainment, 
tourism and retail businesses. We will reward 
businesses that create new jobs by lowering  
the effective direct tax rates and by lowering  
contributions to the CSR fund.
14. We will provide ﬁscal incentives to businesses 
that employ a certain percentage of women.
15. Exports create jobs. We will reward export- 
oriented industries through tax rebates  
and incentives.
16. Tourism creates jobs. [MASKED] promises an ade-
quately capitalised Tourism Development Bank 
to provide low-cost, long-term funds for invest-
ment in tourism-related businesses. We will also 
offer lower rates of corporate and personal 
income tax on tourism-related business income. 
Kaam– Employment and Growth  /  11


Industry
[MASKED] initiated liberalisation in 1991 with a new Industrial Policy. Taking note of the 
changes in the global economy and the Indian economy, [MASKED] promises another radical, 
forward-looking Industrial Policy.
 
The [MASKED] Government mouths empty slogans. Its record is dismal in terms of the growth rate  
of Industry sector GVA and gross capital formation in the Industry sector. [MASKED] promises  
to reverse these disappointing trends.
02
01. [MASKED] promises to increase the share of 
India’s manufacturing sector from the current 
level of 16 per cent of GDP to 25 per cent within 
a period of 5 years and to make India a manufac-
turing hub for the world. [MASKED] believes that 
anything that can be made in another country can 
be made in India. [MASKED] promises that it will 
adopt policies, formulate rules, levy taxes and 
reward entrepreneurship that will make India a 
renowned centre of manufacturing.
02. [MASKED] will work with State Governments to set 
up New Industrial Towns with the required infra-
structure and turn them into manufacturing hubs 
for a variety of industrial products.
03. We will announce policies that will help India  
retain its leading position in the manufacture  
of engineering goods, petroleum products, gems  
& jewellery, drugs & pharmaceuticals, garments  
& textiles and chemicals.
04. We will announce policies that will help India gain 
a leadership position in steel, metals, cement, 
machinery, electronic goods, computer hardware, 
automobiles etc.
05. [MASKED] will announce a ‘Make for the World’ 
policy under which foreign and Indian companies 
will be invited to invest in ‘Exclusive Export-only 
Zones’, manufacture and export their entire pro-
duction, pay no indirect taxes and pay a low rate  
of corporate tax.
06. As the [MASKED] did from 2004 to 2014, we will make 
a determined effort to revive stalled projects 
and bring locked-up capital to use and generate 
employment.
07. We will promote the manufacture and export of  
India’s traditional products like handloom prod-
ucts and handicrafts that employ lakhs of persons.
08. [MASKED] will acquire patents, create a patent pool 
and make advanced technologies available to small 
and medium businesses.
09. Controls have crept into the system in the name 
of regulations. [MASKED] promises to do a quick 
review of the rules and regulations made by 
the [MASKED] Government in the last 5 years and repeal 
as many of them as are necessary to free industry 
and business from the ‘Control Raj.’
10. In the last 5 years, tax authorities have been 
given extraordinary discretionary powers that have 
throttled industry and come to be described as 
‘tax terrorism.’ Investigative agencies have mis-
interpreted the laws and have instilled fear among 
businesspersons. [MASKED] will review these  
discretionary powers and arbitrary actions and 
take steps to allow industry and business to  
function with a large degree of freedom.
17. We recognise the need to create lakhs of low-
skilled jobs in order to absorb young men and 
women who have completed only a few years in 
school. [MASKED] will launch 2 major programmes 
to be implemented through Gram Sabhas and 
urban local bodies that will create 1 crore jobs:
a. Repair and restoration of water bodies  
(‘Water Bodies Restoration Mission’); and
b. Regeneration and afforestation of wasteland 
and degraded land (‘Wasteland Regeneration 
Mission’).
18. [MASKED] will require businesses employing  
100 persons or more to start an apprenticeship  
programme, impart skills, pay a stipend, and  
employ from among the trained apprentices  
whenever a job is created or becomes vacant  
in that business. We will amend The Companies  
(Corporate Social Responsibility Policy) Rules, 
2014 to include ‘Apprenticeship’ as an additional 
activity.
19. We will identify new kinds of jobs that will emerge 
with the advent of new technologies and will offer 
opportunities to youth to acquire the skill-sets 
necessary for these jobs.
Kaam– Employment and Growth  /  12


03
04
Infrastructure
A basic weakness of the Indian economy has been infrastructure. Flawed design, inefﬁcient 
execution, insufﬁcient capacity and poor maintenance of infrastructure have dragged India’s 
growth rate down.
 
[MASKED] promises to address these deﬁciencies with a combination of planning, technology, 
quality and accountability.
 
All available models and instrumentalities will be used to build infrastructure—public sector, 
private sector and public-private partnership.
 
Roads, railway and electricity are among vital infrastructure. They are also crucial public goods.
Cities, Urbanisation and Urban Policy
India is fast urbanising. Nearly 34 per cent of our population lives in towns and cities and the 
number is growing. As in the rest of the world, India’s cities can become engines of growth.
 
The Smart Cities Mission of the [MASKED] government, which replaced the successful JNNURM,  
was a colossal failure and a waste of money with no visible results.
01. [MASKED] promises to augment the total length 
of national highways and increase the pace of 
construction. The focus will be on improved design 
and quality, maintenance and accountability.
02. [MASKED] promises to massively modernise all 
outdated railway infrastructure. New projects 
will be implemented in accordance with the best 
international standards of design and quality.
03. Road construction and railways can be built using 
private capital and capacity. [MASKED] will use 
sector-speciﬁc, tried and tested PPP models to 
increase the supply of these vital public goods.
04. [MASKED] promises to review, re-formulate and 
implement the policy on spectrum and on ex-
ploration and extraction of natural resources. 
The policy will address issues of allocation, capital 
investment, enhanced production, transparency, 
efﬁciency, risk-reward concerns, environmental sus-
tainability, inter-generational equity, accountability, 
competition and appropriate sectoral regulation.
05. We will formulate a policy on Clean Energy in 
existing power plants that use fossil fuels and pro-
mote Green Energy to enhance the share of solar 
and wind energy in the total supply of energy.
06. [MASKED] promises to enhance availability of, and 
access to, electricity in rural areas by encour-
aging investment in off-grid renewable power 
generation with ownership and revenues vesting in 
local bodies. Every village and every home will be 
electriﬁed in the true sense. In the long term, we 
aim to substitute LPG used in homes by electricity 
and solar energy.
01. [MASKED] promises to formulate a comprehensive 
policy on Urbanisation after wide consultation. 
We will address the issues concerning towns 
and cities including city governance, livelihoods, 
housing, habitat, pollution, climate change, urban 
transport and disaster management.
02. [MASKED] will support State Governments to build 
new towns and cities as well as satellite towns.
03. [MASKED] will introduce a new model of governance 
for towns and cities through a directly elected 
mayor with a ﬁxed term of 5 years, an elected 
Council and a separate administrative structure 
for each urban body. The administration will be ac-
countable to the Mayor and the Council and there 
will be a provision to recruit technical experts and 
build capacity as well as multi-disciplinary teams 
to do urban planning and implement  
municipal works.
04. We will enforce the 74th Amendment to the 
Constitution and ensure the devolution of powers, 
functions and funds to the Municipalities and Cor-
porations, making them ﬁnancially independent.
05. [MASKED] promises the Right to Housing for the 
urban poor and protection from arbitrary eviction. 
We will build night shelters for the homeless so 
that no one will sleep in the open.
06. [MASKED] will launch a Slum Upgradation and 
Transformation Scheme to ensure basic services 
such as drinking water, electricity and sanitation 
to slum dwellers. Slums will be transformed by 
replacing huts and kuchha dwellings with proper 
houses, roads and other public facilities.
Kaam– Employment and Growth  /  13


07. Public spaces, public transport, public premises 
and other public facilities in towns and cities will 
be made safe for women, children, persons with 
disabilities, migrants and marginalised sections of 
society. More women will be appointed to govern-
ment and municipal jobs in towns and cities.
08. [MASKED] promises to formulate and implement a 
policy on urban transport with emphasis on met-
ro rail, suburban rail, electric vehicles, public bus 
transport, hired vehicles and shared vehicles. We 
will encourage non-motorised transport, namely, 
walking and cycling.
Rural Development
[MASKED] promises to enhance infrastructure in rural areas and improve the quality of  
public goods such as roads, bridges, water supply, sanitation, electricity and schools.
Informal and Unorganised Sector
[MASKED] promises a fair deal for the crores of workers and the self-employed who toil 
every day in the unorganised and informal sector.
05
06
01. In order to ﬁll the gaps in sector-speciﬁc schemes 
as well correct any unintended bias, we will  
empower Panchayats and Municipalities  
to design and execute infrastructure projects.  
[MASKED] promises to establish a non-lapsable 
Rural Infrastructure Fund that will provide  
loans and grants to speciﬁc infrastructure projects 
undertaken by Panchayats and Municipalities.
02. We will launch MGNREGA 3.0 to address issues 
of water security, soil quality and similar issues 
that aggravate farmers’ distress. To this end,  
we will:
a. Increase the guaranteed days of employment up 
to 150 days in cases where 100 days have been 
achieved in a block/district; 
b. Use MGNREGA labour in the Waterbodies Resto-
ration Mission and the Wasteland Regeneration 
Mission; and
c. Use MGNREGA funds to build public assets such 
as primary health centres, classrooms, libraries 
etc.
03. [MASKED] promises to connect all villages and 
habitations with a population of 250 with a road 
under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana. 
Broadband connectivity will be provided to all 
village Panchayats by the year 2021.
04. The allocation to the National Drinking Water 
Mission that has suffered neglect under the [MASKED] 
government will be increased.
05. We will pass the Right to Homestead Act to  
provide a homestead for every household that 
does not own a home or own land on which a 
house may be built.
01. We will encourage and support micro and  
small enterprises that collectivise unorganised 
sector workers including waste pickers and scrap 
collectors.
02. [MASKED] will ensure that notiﬁed minimum wag-
es are paid to workers in the unorganised sector.
03. [MASKED] will ratify ILO Convention 87 (Freedom 
of Association) and ILO Convention 98 (Right to 
Organise and Collective Bargaining).
04. The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and 
Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 2014 will be 
implemented in letter and spirit.
05. [MASKED] will guarantee portability for the ration 
card possessed by a migrant worker and right to 
access ration articles at the place of work.
06. [MASKED] promises to establish Aajeevika  
Kendras (Livelihood Centres) in all major cities 
and towns where a migrant worker may register 
himself/herself in order to:
a. Access government services;
b. Access basic healthcare;
c. Access crèches and schools for his  
or her children;
d.  Access skill development and training  
centres; and
e. Access legal services.
Kaam– Employment and Growth  /  14


Daam— 
An Economy 
That Works 
For All
To ensure that no Indian is left behind, [MASKED] will provide a Minimum 
Income Support Programme (MISP) or Nyuntam Aay Yojana (NYAY) under 
which Rs. 72,000 a year will be transferred to the poorest 20 per cent 
families in India. We will provide special respite to farmers and farm 
workers, not just through “Karz Maaﬁ” or a loan waiver but by setting 
farmers on the path to “Karz Mukti,” or Freedom from Indebtedness.
15


07
Agriculture, Farmers and Farm Labour
Many years ago, Jawaharlal Nehru said, ‘Everything can wait but not agriculture.’
 
In the last 5 years, under the [MASKED] Government, the agriculture sector has been driven into  
deep crisis. Adequate MSP was denied for 4 years; the procurement machinery was non-existent 
or weak; debt of farmers mounted; prices of inputs increased steadily; credit was inadequate; 
demonetisation devastated the cash-based agricultural economy; co-operative credit societies 
and apex co-operative banks were denied the right to convert their deposits, thereby choking 
co-operative credit to the farmer; the terms of trade moved decisively against agriculture; the 
crop insurance scheme robbed the farmer and enriched the insurance companies; and with little 
or no support from the government farmers and farm labourers were left to fend for themselves.
 
[MASKED] has heard the cry of anguish of farmers and feels the pain of their acute distress.
01. Immediately after forming the governments in 
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, as 
promised, the 3 [MASKED] Governments waived the 
loans of farmers. [MASKED] promises to waive the 
outstanding farm loans in other States as well.
02. We will not stop with just providing “Karz Maaﬁ”  
or a loan waiver. Through a combination of remu-
nerative prices, lower input costs, and assured 
access to institutional credit, we will set our Kisans 
on the path to “Karz Mukti,” or Freedom from 
Indebtedness.
03. Debt is a civil liability and we will not allow  
criminal proceedings to be instituted against  
a farmer who is unable to pay his/her debt.
04. In order to ensure priority to the issues affecting 
the agriculture sector, we will present a separate 
“Kisan Budget.”
05. [MASKED] promises to establish a permanent 
National Commission on Agricultural Devel-
opment and Planning consisting of farmers, 
agricultural scientists and agricultural economists 
to examine and advise the government on how to 
make agriculture viable, competitive and remuner-
ative. The recommendations of the Commission 
shall be ordinarily binding on the government. The 
Commission will subsume the existing Commission 
for Agricultural Costs and Prices and recommend 
appropriate minimum support prices.
06. [MASKED] also promises to establish a Commission 
on Marginal Farmers and Agricultural Labour 
to advise on policies and programmes that will 
help them earn income from higher wages and 
from non-crop based agriculture such as horticul-
ture and ﬂoriculture, dairying and poultry.
07. We will completely re-design the [MASKED] government’s 
failed Fasal Bima Yojana (Crop Insurance 
Scheme) that has only enriched the insurance 
companies at the cost of the farmers. We will 
direct insurance companies to offer crop insurance 
and charge premiums on the principle of ‘no proﬁt, 
no loss.’
08. [MASKED] promises to work with State Governments 
to digitise land ownership and land tenancy  
records and, in particular, recognise ownership  
and tenancy rights of women farmers and  
ensure women get the beneﬁts of agriculture- 
related schemes.
09. [MASKED] will promote Farmer Producer Compa-
nies/Organisations to enable farmers to access 
inputs, technology and markets.
10. We will review the prices of agricultural inputs, 
extend subsidies where necessary, and establish 
facilities to hire farm machinery.
11. [MASKED] will repeal the Agricultural Produce 
Market Committees Act and make trade in  
agricultural produce—including exports and  
inter-state trade—free from all restrictions.
12. We will establish farmers’ markets with  
adequate infrastructure and support in large  
villages and small towns to enable the farmer to 
bring his/her produce and freely market the same.
13. [MASKED] will formulate a policy on export and 
import of agricultural products that will support 
farmers and Farmer Producer Companies/Organisa-
tions and enhance their income.
14. [MASKED] promises to formulate a policy to enable 
the construction of modern warehouses, cold  
storage and food processing facilities in every 
block of the country.
15. We will revive, strengthen and improve the old  
system of ‘Agricultural Extension Services’  
and bring the best knowledge and best practices  
to every agricultural holding in the country.
16. [MASKED] will encourage farmers to diversify into 
the production of local varieties of millets and 
pulses that can be procured for the PDS, Mid-Day 
Meals Scheme and the ICDS programme.
17. [MASKED] promises a major programme to promote 
horticulture, pisciculture and sericulture for 
diversiﬁcation and greater income for farmers. We 
will launch a national project to double the value 
of production in 5 years in dairying and poultry.
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  16


18. [MASKED] will promote organic farming, encour-
age farmers to use mixed fertilizers and pesticides, 
support veriﬁcation of organic products, and help 
them secure better prices for organic products.
19. [MASKED] promises to double the funding in  
5 years for teaching, R&D, agriculture-related 
pure sciences and applied science and technol-
ogy in the agricultural sector. We will establish a 
College of Agriculture and a College of Veterinary 
Sciences in every district of the country.
20. [MASKED] promises that the distortions that have 
crept into the text and the implementation of the 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Reset-
tlement Act, 2013 and the Forest Rights Act, 
2006 will be removed and the original purposes  
of the Acts restored and enforced.
21. The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 belongs  
to the age of controls. [MASKED] promises to  
replace the Act by an enabling law that can  
be invoked only in the case of emergencies.
22. Building on past experience, [MASKED] will  
re-design MGNREGA and provide for:
a. Increasing the guaranteed days of employment 
up to 150 days in cases where 100 days have 
been achieved in a block/district; 
b. Use of labour in the Waterbodies Restoration 
and the Wasteland Regeneration Missions;
c. Building village-level assets such as primary 
health centres, classrooms, libraries etc.
08
Economic Policy
India is a developing country aspiring to be a middle-income country by the year 2030.  
Wealth creation and the welfare of our people are our 2 principal goals.
[MASKED] economic philosophy is based on embracing the idea of an open and liberal market 
economy, creation of wealth, sustainable development, reduction of inequalities and assurance 
of welfare of all sections of the people. Such growth will be driven by the private sector and a 
viable public sector and underpinned by a robust system of social security.
 
Our economy is still over-regulated. Structural problems remain. Government control and  
bureaucratic interference are aplenty. Regulators have morphed into controllers. There is  
growing interference by the courts in economic policies. The [MASKED] Government has reversed  
the clock of reforms. [MASKED] promises to undo these distortions and restore an open,  
liberal market economy.
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  17


01. Fiscal stability is the starting point. [MASKED] 
promises to reverse the [MASKED] Government’s ﬁddling 
with the target of ﬁscal deﬁcit. [MASKED] promis-
es to achieve the target of 3 per cent of GDP by 
2020-21 and remain under that limit. The revenue 
deﬁcit will be contained, as far as possible, under 
1 per cent of GDP. Off-Budget and extra-Budget 
borrowings will be faithfully reported with the jus-
tiﬁcation for such debt and the means of servicing 
and repaying such debt.
02. Monetary policy is the province of the Reserve 
Bank of India. [MASKED] promises to reverse 
the unwarranted and illegal interference by the 
[MASKED] government into the functioning of the RBI. 
[MASKED] will respect the autonomy of the RBI 
in matters reserved to the RBI under the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1939, including the formulation 
of monetary policy. However, the Governor shall pe-
riodically render an account to a committee of Par-
liament. [MASKED] promises that the government 
will work closely with the RBI to ensure that ﬁscal 
policy and monetary policy are aligned to achieve 
the common goal of growth with price stability. 
03. Sustained economic growth is the path toward  
creating wealth. Millions of people produce goods 
and services and they must have a large degree  
of freedom, unfettered by excessive regulations.  
[MASKED] will provide a conducive policy climate 
that will recognise the contributions of the pri-
vate sector and the public sector, promote entre-
preneurship, encourage innovation, and employ 
advanced technology and reward risk-taking.
04. We are the party that ﬁrst declared the criticality  
of high and sustained economic growth mea-
sured by GDP. [MASKED] reiterates its ﬁrm belief in 
a high rate of growth of GDP. Hence, the 4 drivers 
of economic growth are important and the Con-
gress wishes to state its position on each of these:
a. Private Investment: In an open, market econo-
my, the private sector must play the lead role in 
identifying opportunities, mobilising resources, 
adopting advanced technology, producing goods 
and services, and securing domestic and foreign 
markets. [MASKED] promises to extend full 
support to the private sector and to revive the 
animal spirits of our entrepreneurs.
b. Government Expenditure: Government expen-
diture must play a lead role in the creation and 
provision of public goods. [MASKED] promises 
adequate expenditure on roads, railways,  
waterways, drinking water, sanitation, healthcare, 
education, national and internal security.
c. Domestic Consumption: In a developing 
country, rise in consumption is a sign of healthy 
economic growth. It is important that the poorer 
sections of our people consume more. Supply of 
goods and services must be abundant and prices 
must be reasonably stable. [MASKED] will repose 
faith in the trading community and create a 
policy environment that will encourage domestic 
consumption.
d. Exports: No country has achieved high eco-
nomic growth without high growth of exports. 
An example is India during the [MASKED] period 
from 2004 to 2014. [MASKED] will adopt a  
policy on foreign trade that will ensure that 
exports become, once again, a key driver of 
economic growth.
05. [MASKED] promises to encourage saving, especially 
household saving, through suitable rewards for 
savers. Savings provide the resources for invest-
ment. Our goal will be to achieve a savings level 
of 40 per cent of GDP and a Gross Capital For-
mation level of 35 per cent of GDP. We will work 
with banks and insurance companies to introduce 
simple ﬁnancial products for households.
06. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) plays a crucial 
part in development. FDI will be welcomed in all 
sectors, subject to exceptions on the ground of 
national security. Rules and regulations will be 
minimal. FDI will be accorded national treatment 
and there will be a level playing ﬁeld for foreign 
and domestic investors. There will be no expropria-
tion and no retrospective taxation.
07. Investments have to be prudently distributed 
among the different sectors—agriculture and 
allied activities, industry, and services with special 
emphasis on education and healthcare. [MASKED] 
believes in the crucial role played by market in 
allocation of resources. Where it is absolutely  
necessary, there will be policy intervention to  
prevent misallocation of resources.
08. [MASKED] promises to review all laws, rules  
and regulations governing investments within  
3 months. Instruments that are inconsistent with  
a market economy or outdated or obstructionist 
will be repealed.
09. Foreign Trade Policy will be reviewed and restat-
ed within 3 months. Exports and imports shall be 
free and consistent with WTO rules. Any instrument 
that has the effect of altering this guiding principle 
will be supported by sufﬁcient justiﬁcation and its 
operation will be limited to a sunset date.
10. Every sector of the economy needs credit. A ro-
bust and healthy banking system, supplemented 
by non-banking ﬁnance companies, is critical to 
delivery of credit. While the RBI is the regulator of 
banks and NBFCs, the government has the respon-
sibility to ensure that there is adequate liquidity, 
cash in circulation and ﬂow of credit. The [MASKED] 
Government denied adequate credit to MSMEs, 
agriculture, trade and exports. They created the 
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  18


NPA scare that brought lending to a virtual halt. 
A one-size-ﬁts-all approach drove companies into 
insolvency. Demonetisation shut out all sources  
of informal credit. The result is that the agriculture 
sector is in acute distress, MSMEs are shut  
or struggling to survive, trade is paralysed, and  
the volume of merchandise exports was ﬂat for  
4 years. [MASKED] promises to reverse these gross 
distortions and, working closely with the RBI,  
re-start the process of credit delivery and ensure 
sufﬁcient liquidity and cash in circulation.
11. India must increase the share of manufacturing 
from the current level of 16 per cent to 25 per- 
cent in a period of 5 years. [MASKED] believes that 
anything that can be made in another country can 
be made in India. [MASKED] promises that it will 
adopt policies, formulate rules, levy taxes and 
reward entrepreneurship that will make India  
a global hub of manufacturing.
12. [MASKED] recognises that business—be it manufac-
turing or supply or trade or exports—runs best on 
predictable and stable laws, protection of property 
rights and sanctity of contracts. [MASKED] promis-
es to enact and enforce a comprehensive Law on 
Doing Business in India that will incorporate the 
best business practices and rules.
13. We will endeavor to bring every Fortune 500 
company to set up a business in India.
14. [MASKED] promises to encourage and incentivise 
starting of new businesses. The Angel Tax  
imposed on Start-Ups will be withdrawn  
completely. We will make India an innovation hub.
15. MSMEs were badly hit by demonetisation and  
a ﬂawed GST. [MASKED] promises to devise a  
rehabilitation plan for MSMEs that were  
severely affected and help them revive and grow.
16. [MASKED] promises to disinvest from non-core, 
non-strategic central public sector enterprises.
17. [MASKED] promises good and competent gover-
nance. The capacity of the traditional bureaucracy 
to deliver on our economic goals has been inade-
quate. We promise to induct into the administra-
tion good economic policy makers and managers 
and give them a large degree of autonomy to 
design and implement policies that will advance 
the economic goals of the government.
18. Unless we are vigilant, government has a tendency 
to interfere with markets as well as re-acquire  
control over trade, industry and business. Gov-
ernment has a role in an open and liberal market 
economy and it is worthwhile to state the  
[MASKED] position on the role of government:
a. We must get government out of gratuitous 
interventions in the market;
b. We must get government into addressing  
notable market failures through regulation  
(e.g. capital market, banking, etc.); and
c. We must build capacity in government to do  
the things it must do (e.g. taxation, delivery  
of public goods and services, etc.)
19. [MASKED] is conscious that while much has been 
achieved since liberalisation in 1991, there is 
much more to be done. Between 2004 and 2014, 
14 crore people were lifted out of poverty. That 
task has to be continued with renewed vigour. 
[MASKED] promises that between 2019 and 2024, 
another 10 crore people will be lifted out of pov-
erty and the ground will be prepared to wipe out 
poverty—and ensure that no one is left behind— 
by 2030. 
09
Minimum Income Support Programme or  
Nyuntam Aay Yojana (NYAY)
The abolition of poverty remains the foremost goal of the [MASKED]. We recall with pride that 
the [MASKED]-led [MASKED] government lifted 14 crore people out of poverty between 2004 and 
2014.
 
It is true that rapid and broad-based growth will reduce poverty and, in the medium to long 
term, eliminate poverty. On the other hand, decisive and focused intervention has the capac-
ity to eliminate poverty within a decade. [MASKED], therefore, sets the goal of elimination of 
abject poverty by the year 2030.
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  19


01. [MASKED] believes that the size of India’s GDP and 
the level of Total Expenditure (Central and State 
Governments) allow us to undertake an ambitious 
programme of cash transfer to the poorest sec-
tions of the people without in anyway affecting the 
goal of ﬁscal prudence. The main features of the 
Minimum Income Support Programme (MISP) 
or Nyuntam Aay Yojana (NYAY) will be:
a. The target population will be 5 crore families 
who constitute the poorest 20 per cent of all 
families. They will be the beneﬁciaries of MISP 
or NYAY;
b. Each family will be guaranteed a cash transfer of 
Rs. 72,000 a year; 
c. As far as possible, the money will be transferred 
to the account of a woman of the family who 
has a bank account or who will be urged to open 
a bank account;
d. There will a Design phase (3 months) followed 
by a Pilot and Testing phase (6–9 months) 
before roll-out;
e. The rollout will be implemented in phases;
f. The estimated cost will be <1 per cent of GDP 
in Year 1 and <2 per cent of GDP in Year 2 and 
thereafter. 
g. As the nominal GDP grows and families move 
out of poverty, the cost will decline as a propor-
tion of GDP. 
02. [MASKED] will appoint an independent panel 
of eminent economists, social scientists and 
statisticians to oversee the design, testing, roll-
out and implementation of the programme. The 
programme will move from one stage to the other 
only after a ‘go ahead’ from the panel. [MASKED] 
intends to implement NYAY as a joint scheme 
of the Central and State Governments. The 
scheme will be funded through new revenues and 
rationalisation of expenditure. Current merit sub-
sidy schemes that are intended to achieve speciﬁc 
objectives will be continued.
03. The [MASKED] goal is that ‘No Indian Family Shall 
Be Left Behind.’
Taxation and Tax Reforms
The 2 major taxes that will be the backbone of the economy are Income Tax and Goods and 
Services Tax. [MASKED] reiterates its ﬁrm belief that the principles underlying these taxes 
should be simplicity, transparency and progressivity. Besides, a good tax administration 
must place trust in, and enjoy the trust of, taxpayers. [MASKED] will put an end to the tax 
terrorism unleashed by the [MASKED] government that has put uncertainty and fear in the minds 
of individuals and businesses.
10
 
Direct Taxes Code
01. [MASKED] promises to enact the Direct Taxes Code 
in the ﬁrst year of our government. It will usher in 
an era of simplicity, transparency, tax equity, easy 
compliance and impartial administration.
02. [MASKED] promises that the Direct Taxes Code  
will levy taxes at reasonable and progres-
sive rates having regard to the level of current 
incomes, income inequalities and the principles 
of tax equity.
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  20
To eliminate abject poverty by 
2030, [MASKED] will introduce 
Nyuntam Aay Yojana to provide 
Rs. 72,000 a year to the poorest 
20 per cent families in India.


 
Goods & Services Tax 2.0
01. [MASKED] promises to review and replace the  
current GST laws with the GST 2.0 regime that  
will truly reﬂect the intent and purpose of a 
non-cascading, value-added, indirect tax.
02. The GST 2.0 regime will be based on a single, 
moderate, standard rate of tax on all goods  
and services. The rate will be revenue neutral to 
the current indirect tax revenues of the Central  
and State Governments and will take note of the 
potential of GST 2.0 to boost their tax revenues.
03. The GST 2.0 regime will levy a special rate of  
duty on demerit goods.
04. GST 2.0 will be easy to administer, easy to  
understand by the taxpayer, and easy to comply 
with. We are conﬁdent that GST 2.0 will promote 
growth, new businesses and employment. The  
website under GST 2.0 will be re-designed and 
made user-friendly with inputs from the taxpayers.
05. [MASKED] promises that Real Estate (all sectors), 
Petroleum Products, Tobacco and Liquor will be 
brought within the ambit of GST 2.0 in a manner 
and time period not exceeding 2 years agreed to  
in the GST Council.
06. Essential goods of mass consumption (such as 
food grains, lifesaving drugs, vaccines, etc.) and 
essential services will be exempted from GST 2.0 
or zero-rated.
07. All goods and services that are exported will  
be zero-rated and not subject to GST 2.0. 
08. [MASKED] promises that threshold exemption for 
small businesses will not be affected by inter-state 
supply of goods or services.
09. In order to support small, unregistered business-
es that supply goods and services, there will be 
no GST liability on the purchaser through the 
reverse charge mechanism.
10. [MASKED] promises to abolish the e-way bill. Tax 
evasion will be detected through the risk manage-
ment mechanism and strengthening the intelli-
gence machinery.
11. [MASKED] will endeavor to allocate a share of GST 
revenues to Panchayats and Municipalities.
12. [MASKED] promises that a taxpayer will be required 
to ﬁle a simple, single quarterly return for his/
her business and an annual return. Every tax payer 
will be subject to assessment by a single authority 
based upon turnover.
13. The GST Council will be the policy-making body 
and will be served by a permanent secretariat of 
tax economists, tax policy experts and tax pro-
fessionals. Its minutes will be put in the public 
domain.
14. [MASKED] promises that the DTC and GST 2.0  
will be essentially civil laws and any violations 
will attract civil penalties that will be proportionate 
to the tax evaded. Prosecution under DTC and GST 
2.0 will be only in cases of criminal conspiracy or 
corruption or fraud.
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  21


01. [MASKED] promises a comprehensive review of 
the concept, role and functions of Public Sector 
Banks (PSBs) in order to make PSBs robust and 
competitive with healthy balance sheets.
02. [MASKED] will amalgamate 2 or more PSBs so 
that there will be only 6-8 PSBs with a national 
presence and reach. Each of the amalgamated 
PSBs will be adequately capitalised.
03. We will undertake a comprehensive review of the 
governance structure of PSBs and implement 
changes to make the PSB an independent com-
mercial banking organisation that is competitive, 
healthy, efﬁcient and proﬁtable. We will abolish  
the redundant Banking Board Bureau.
04. [MASKED] promises that PSBs will continue to im-
plement policies to serve the larger public interest 
including lending to priority and other disad-
vantaged sectors that are denied adequate credit.
05. We are concerned by the recent failure of some 
NBFCs that has affected the bond market, mutual 
funds and the ﬂow of credit. [MASKED] promises 
to review and strengthen the regulatory regime 
of NBFCs in order to prevent such failures and to 
restore investor conﬁdence.
06. We will take the necessary policy and administra-
tive measures to develop a robust, deep and liquid 
corporate bond market, municipal bond market 
and infrastructure investment trusts.
07. [MASKED] promises to promote new Development 
Banks in order to provide long-term credit to  
development and infrastructure projects.
08. Indian-owned new technology companies face a 
stiff capital barrier when they are poised to scale-
up to global size and standards. [MASKED] will  
set up an India Global Companies Fund and  
create a policy environment to support Indian- 
owned companies to become global companies.
09. [MASKED] will encourage the establishment  
of State-level and Regional-level institutions,  
including small banks, to provide bank credit  
to MSMEs. [MASKED] will also encourage State 
Governments to revive State Financial Corporations 
to provide long-term credit and risk capital to 
MSMEs.
10. We will strengthen and technologically-enable 
Regional Rural Banks and Banking Correspon-
dents to accelerate ﬁnancial inclusion so that 
citizens are provided banking services in their 
neighbourhood.
11. [MASKED] will work with the RBI to simplify the  
KYC process, avoid repetitive veriﬁcation, and  
use a wider range of documents for the purpose.
12. [MASKED] promises to take necessary measures to 
develop a deep and broad securities market that 
will offer products that will attract more investors 
to the securities market, give them safe and ade-
quate returns and offer investment solutions  
to their long term needs.
13. We will adopt policies to attract more  
investment—Indian and foreign—in our  
ﬁnancial markets.
14. We promise to take hard measures to prevent 
fraud in the banking, securities and ﬁnancial  
markets (including money collection schemes)  
and deliver swift and deterrent punishment  
to offenders.
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  22
11
Banking and Financial Sector
[MASKED] afﬁrms its belief in a competitive banking and ﬁnancial sector.
 
The [MASKED] government has considerably weakened the banking sector in the last 5 years; there has 
been a sharp rise in non-performing assets; crony capitalism has thrived; and deserving sectors 
and individuals have been denied credit. [MASKED] promises to reverse these developments.
[MASKED] will encourage the 
establishment of State-level  
and Regional-level institutions,  
including small banks, to provide 
bank credit to MSMEs. 


01. [MASKED] promises to work with industry to  
increase the expenditure on science and  
technology to 2 per cent of GDP.
02. [MASKED] promises to allocate sufﬁcient funds  
to promote science, technology and innovation.
03. [MASKED] promises to recruit more scientists to 
the various institutes of research and development 
and to ﬁll all current vacancies in the posts of 
researchers and scientists within 12 months.
04. We will strengthen Science Departments in 
NAAC-graded colleges and universities, provide 
them funds for equipment, laboratories and more 
teachers, and encourage them to publish their 
research.  
05. [MASKED] promises to strengthen patent laws and 
support Indian inventors and innovators to secure 
international patent protection.
06. We will create a patent pool, acquire patents and 
allow access to patented technology to businesses 
at affordable cost.
07. We will revitalise the National Innovation  
Council and make it the premier body to formu-
late, debate, analyse and implement strategies  
for innovation and for the deployment of innovative 
technologies in different areas.
08. We will establish a National Mission focused  
on sunrise technologies such as Big Data,  
Machine Learning, Internet of Things, 3-D Printing 
and Manufacturing, and Knowledge Networks.
09. [MASKED] promises to enhance the India Inclusive 
Innovation Fund to provide funds to innovative 
enterprises to scale-up and expand their opera-
tions as well as engage with persons at the bottom 
of the economic pyramid in order to promote inno-
vation at the grassroots.
10. [MASKED] will set up a Scenario Planning and 
Strategic Futures Ofﬁce to look at medium- 
to-long term strategic opportunities and risks  
for the country as an aid to informed policy  
making.
11. [MASKED] promises to set up a National Data  
Science Institute with adequate funding and 
human resources to train and produce world-class 
Data Scientists.
13
Fisheries and Fisherfolk
Over 140 lakh Indians depend, directly or indirectly, on ﬁshing as a source of livelihood.  
[MASKED] is committed to faster growth of the ﬁsheries industry.
01. [MASKED] will establish a separate Ministry  
of Fisheries and Welfare of Fisherfolk.
02. We will constitute a National Fisherfolk Commis-
sion to promote ﬁshing and the welfare of ﬁsher-
folk. It will address indebtedness and appropriate 
funding mechanisms for ﬁshing.
03. [MASKED] promises to recognise inland ﬁshing 
and aquaculture as ‘agriculture’ and extend to 
them all the beneﬁts available to agriculture.
04. [MASKED] promises to establish a permanent 
mechanism with neighbouring countries, e.g. 
Sri Lanka and Pakistan, to resolve problems faced 
by ﬁsherfolk and to eliminate conﬂict, violence,  
coercive action and loss of lives, and to improve 
the livelihood opportunities of the ﬁshing  
community.
Science, Technology and Innovation
Investment in science, technology and innovation is an investment in the future of the 
country. Development of scientiﬁc temper and inculcating a spirit of inquiry are critical for 
India’s progress.
12
Daam—An Economy That Works For All  /  23


Shaan— 
Pride in Our 
Hard and  
Soft Power
[MASKED] will reverse the trend of declining defence spending under the 
[MASKED] government, and will ensure that defence spending is increased 
to meet the requirements of the Armed Forces. We will expedite all 
modernisation programmes of the Armed Forces in a transparent manner, 
categorically address any remaining anomalies in one-rank one-pension 
for our Armed Forces, and improve social security, education and health 
facilities for our Paramilitary Forces and families.
24 


14
15
National Security
National security is dependent on a sound defence policy, a sound foreign policy and wise 
leadership. National security is not enhanced by chest-thumping or exaggerated claims.
Internal Security
[MASKED] promises that it will keep a vigilant eye on the security situation and take every 
measure that is required to maintain law and order and to provide a sense of security for every 
citizen and for every visitor to India.
01. [MASKED] will reverse the trend of declining de-
fence spending under the [MASKED] government, and 
will ensure that defence spending is increased  
to meet the requirements of the Armed Forces.  
We will expedite all modernisation programmes 
of the armed forces in a transparent manner.
02. [MASKED] promises to take strategic and hard  
measures to defend the territorial integrity  
of India and ensure the safety of our people.
03. The concept of national security in the 21st century 
has expanded beyond defence of the territory to 
include data security, cyber security, ﬁnancial 
security, communication security and security of 
trade routes. [MASKED] promises to evolve suitable 
policies to address each of these subjects.
04. [MASKED] will establish the ofﬁce of Chief of De-
fence Staff (CDS) to be the principal adviser to 
the Government on matters relating to defence.
05. [MASKED] will provide a statutory basis to the  
National Security Council (NSC) and the  
ofﬁce of National Security Adviser (NSA). Their 
powers and functions will be deﬁned under the law 
and both authorities, and the agencies under them, 
will be accountable to Parliament.
06. The [MASKED] government left the National Security 
Advisory Board in limbo between January 2015 
and October 2016 and then truncated the body. 
[MASKED] will re-establish the NSAB, provide a 
statutory basis to the body, appoint experts from 
different disciplines and ensure that it will function 
as a permanent, professional advisory body advis-
ing the NSC and the government.
07. [MASKED] promises to rapidly expand domestic 
capacity to manufacture defence and security 
equipment. We will create manufacturing capac-
ities in the public sector and in pre-qualiﬁed, 
security-cleared private sector companies.
01. The key to internal security is intelligence, analy- 
sis and quick response. [MASKED] had put in place 
the Multi-Agency Centre and the NSG regional 
hubs. [MASKED] had also proposed to establish  
the National Counter-Terrorism Centre and 
NATGRID. The [MASKED] government dismantled the  
preparatory work and wasted 5 years. NCTC was 
put in the cold storage and NATGRID is yet to be 
made operational. [MASKED] promises that NCTC 
will be set up within 3 months and NATGRID will  
be made operational by December 2019.
02. The most serious threats to internal security 
emanate from (1) terrorism, (2) inﬁltration 
of militants, (3) Maoism or Naxalism and (4) 
caste or communal violence. [MASKED] believes 
that each of these threats deserves a separate and 
distinct response.
a. We promise an uncompromising approach and 
hard measures to put an end to terrorism and  
to the inﬁltration of militants.
b. In the case of Maoism, the [MASKED] will reso-
lutely ﬁght violent activities. At the same time, 
[MASKED] will address developmental challenges 
in the areas concerned, enlist the support  
of the people and win over the Maoist cadres.
c. In the case of caste or communal violence,  
[MASKED] will put down such violence with a  
ﬁrm hand using the police forces at its com-
mand, apprehend the instigators and bring  
them to justice. There will be no room for 
self-appointed vigilante groups and moral  
policing brigades.
03. [MASKED] will work with State Governments to  
increase the strength of State police forces,  
ﬁll all vacancies, equip and train them, and deploy 
them impartially to maintain law and order and  
to detect and punish violators and instigators.
04. [MASKED] promises to take strong action with 
respect to crimes against women, Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and minorities. The 
law will be applied on the perpetrators without fear 
or favour. They will not be allowed to walk on the 
streets with a sense of impunity.
05. [MASKED] will hold the District Administration 
responsible for riots, caste or communal violence, 
large scale crimes against women, and for the 
widespread breakdown of law and order.
Shaan—Pride in Our Hard and Soft Power  /  25


16
Foreign Policy
India’s foreign policy was profoundly inﬂuenced by the freedom movement and was devel-
oped through the collective wisdom of far-sighted leaders. Unfortunately, foreign policy under 
the [MASKED] has been reduced to the whim of one man, has become transactional and has been 
marked by outrageous ﬂip-ﬂops. Our national interest has been the casualty. We promise to 
reverse these damaging developments and repose faith in our diplomatic corps to advise on, 
formulate and conduct foreign policy.
01. [MASKED] afﬁrms its ﬁrm belief in the continued 
relevance of the policy of friendship, peaceful 
co-existence, non-alignment, independence  
of thought and action, and increased bilateral  
engagement in its relations with other countries  
of the world. 
02. [MASKED] promises to establish a National Council 
on Foreign Policy consisting of members of the 
Cabinet Committee on Security, scholars, domain 
experts and diplomats to advise the Government 
on matters concerning foreign policy.
03. We will work closely with all countries of the world, 
and particularly India’s neighbours and the G-20 
countries, in various multi-lateral forums and 
institutions.
04. Foreign Trade will be an important element of our 
foreign policy and we promise to make every effort 
to signiﬁcantly increase trade with other countries.
05. It was a [MASKED] government that opened  
India’s economy to other countries of the world. 
[MASKED] promises to strengthen its relations  
with other countries through enhanced economic  
co-operation, two-way investments and closer  
relations between businesspersons.
06. [MASKED] is implacably opposed to terrorism any-
where in the world and promises to work with oth-
er countries to eliminate terrorist groups, terrorist 
acts and cross-border terrorism. We will persuade 
the United Nations to constantly review the list of 
terrorists and to expand the scope of sanctions.
07. [MASKED] will take determined steps to persuade 
other countries to compel Pakistan to veriﬁably 
end its support to the terrorist groups that it  
shelters.
08. [MASKED] promises to pass a Law on Asylum con-
sistent with international treaties and conventions.
09. We will re-double the efforts to win for permanent 
membership India in the UN Security Council and 
the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
10. [MASKED] will work with SAARC and ASEAN coun-
tries to enhance the volume of trade, investments, 
tourism and cultural exchanges and reap the bene-
ﬁts of geographical proximity.
11. [MASKED] promises to establish effective mecha-
nisms with neighbouring countries, especially Sri 
Lanka and Pakistan, to resolve the problems faced 
by ﬁshermen, to eliminate conﬂict, coercive action 
and loss of lives, and to improve livelihood oppor-
tunities for our ﬁshing communities.
12. We will strengthen the Indian Council of  
Cultural Relations, expand its engagement with 
other countries and encourage the Council to in-
crease the projection of India’s soft power globally.
13. [MASKED] promises to increase signiﬁcantly the size 
of the Foreign Service, induct domain experts and 
scholars, open more missions abroad, participate 
more effectively in international organisations, 
leverage our growing economy and acquire a  
position of leadership in the world. 
[MASKED] is implacably opposed 
to terrorism anywhere in the 
world and promises to eliminate 
terrorist groups, terrorist acts  
and cross-border terrorism.
Shaan—Pride in Our Hard and Soft Power  /  26


17
18
Border Security
India’s borders must be secure. Secure borders protect the sovereignty and integrity of India.
 
[MASKED] promises to enhance border security by undertaking a number of measures.
Ex-Servicemen
01. We will increase the strength of border guarding 
forces—BSF, SSB, ITBP and Assam Riﬂes—and 
post them on or close to the border to prevent 
inﬁltration, illegal immigration and smuggling.
02. We will construct modern, well-equipped Inte-
grated Border Outposts to provide good working 
and living conditions for the forces. The distance 
between 2 border outposts will be reduced. The 
period of posting in high altitude border outposts 
will be reduced to 3 months at a time.
03. We will accelerate the construction of border 
roads along all borders of India, especially, the 
India-China border. We will enhance the capacity of 
the Border Roads Organisation and create separate 
divisions to build roads along the India-China and 
the India-Myanmar borders.
01. Under the [MASKED] Governments, [MASKED] accepted 
the principle of One Rank One Pension (OROP) 
and took 3 steps in 2006, 2010 and 2013 to-
wards implementing the same. In February 2014, 
the [MASKED] Government decided to close the gap for 
all retirees in all ranks. Ex-servicemen believe that 
the [MASKED] Government has not implemented OROP to 
their satisfaction. [MASKED] promises to remove the 
anomalies in the implementation of OROP.
02. [MASKED] promises to formulate and implement 
a policy of compensation to the families of 
martyrs that will include full pay and allowances, 
funding children’s education, a government job 
for a member of the martyr’s family and suitable 
monetary compensation.
03. [MASKED] will formulate and implement a policy 
that will allow Armed Forces personnel, who  
retire after a period of colour service or earlier, 
lateral entry into the civil services based on  
their qualiﬁcations.
04. We will also allow Armed Forces personnel who 
retire before the age of 40 years to enter the  
Central Armed Police Forces at suitable levels 
based on their qualiﬁcations and physical ﬁtness.
05. [MASKED] promises to substantially expand the 
capacity of the Armed Forces medical corps and 
hospitals to cater to the needs of ex-servicemen 
and their families.
06. [MASKED] will revise the procedure to determine 
the disability of injured armed forces person- 
nel and make the determination ﬁnal subject to  
an appeal only at the instance of the disabled  
person. All pending appeals ﬁled by the Ministry  
of Defence will be withdrawn.
[MASKED] promises to substantially 
expand the capacity of the Armed 
Forces medical corps and hospitals 
to cater to the needs of ex-
servicemen and their families.
Shaan—Pride in Our Hard and Soft Power  /  27


19
Central Armed Police Forces
The Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) are our ﬁrst line of defence at our borders. They are 
also the force of choice when there is a breakdown of law and order. Thousands of jawans have 
sacriﬁced their lives in the discharge of their duties. [MASKED] promises to enhance the capa-
bilities of the force and to improve the welfare of our jawans.
01. We will increase the strength of the CAPFs to 
meet the growing requirements of border security 
and internal security
02. At any given time, an adequate number of battal-
ions will be on rest, recuperation and training 
and will not be deployed on operational duties.
03. [MASKED] promises to ensure increased repre-
sentation of women to achieve a minimum of 
33 per cent in the force strength of CISF, CRPF 
and BSF. Every effort will be made to induct more 
women into the other border guarding forces, 
namely, ITBP, SSB and Assam Riﬂes.
04. We will enhance the facilities of health, educa-
tion and housing for the personnel of the CAPFs 
and their families to bring them on par with the 
facilities provided for the Armed Forces. We will set 
up schools on the model of Sainik schools to en-
hance educational opportunities for their children.
05. [MASKED] promises to enhance the status of the 
jawan and the beneﬁts to the families of jawans in 
cases were the jawan dies in action.
06. We will set up a Committee to draft new Service 
Rules for personnel of the CAPFs.
Art, Culture and Heritage
Art, culture and heritage constitute the identity of a people. A multi-cultural country like India 
can be truly proud of our many identities, which deserve to be protected and preserved.
20
01. [MASKED] is committed to protecting the rich 
diversity of India’s art and culture and to ensuring 
it ﬂourishes in an atmosphere of freedom and 
creativity. We will resolutely oppose censorship 
as well as any attempt to denigrate the art and 
culture of any group. 
02. Sufﬁcient support and funds will be provided  
to preserve and promote the art, culture and  
heritage of the groups of people whose identities 
are unique and are of anthropological signiﬁcance.
03. We will provide fellowships to artists and crafts-
people working in the ﬁeld of traditional arts and 
crafts.
04. [MASKED] will guarantee artistic freedom. Artists 
and craftsmen will enjoy the freedom to express 
their views in any form without fear of censorship 
or retribution. Attempts by vigilante groups to 
censor or intimidate artists will be viewed seriously 
and action against them will be taken according  
to the law.
Shaan—Pride in Our Hard and Soft Power  /  28


21
22
Tourism
Foreign tourist arrivals in India in 2018 is estimated at about 1 crore. Comparing this number 
with the numbers of comparable countries, it indicates substantial under-performance.  
[MASKED] will take measures to achieve an annual growth of 20 per cent in tourist arrivals.
 
Tourism is important for many reasons, the most important being its capacity to create jobs  
for people with different levels of education.
Non-Resident Indians
[MASKED] afﬁrms its belief that non-resident Indians, wherever they live and work,  
are an inseparable part of India.
01. [MASKED] promises a special tax regime  
for tourism-related businesses and income.
02. We will establish an adequately capitalised  
Tourism Development Bank to provide low-cost, 
long-term funds for investment in tourism-related 
businesses.
03. [MASKED] will work with State Governments to 
provide, and improve, the infrastructure in  
and around places of tourist interest.
04. [MASKED] will work with State Governments to cre-
ate young volunteer groups to guide and assist 
visitors at important places of tourist interest.
05. India’s Missions abroad will be tasked with 
encouraging more visitors to India from the country 
to which each Mission is accredited. 
06. Visa-on-Arrival Scheme will be expanded to 
include more countries and more categories of  
visitors. No fee will be charged for tourist visas  
for a period of 3 years.
01. [MASKED] promises to re-establish the  
Ministry of Overseas Indians that will be tasked 
to address the concerns of NRIs including their 
safety, conditions of work, social security and 
health beneﬁts, education of their children, need 
for ﬁnancial services and safe return to India.
02. [MASKED] will task India’s Missions abroad to pay 
special attention to work safety and work condi-
tions of Indian citizens in foreign countries. We will 
appoint a Committee of Overseas Indian Citizens to 
review the work of the Missions in this regard.
03. We will review and expand the opportunities for 
higher education and review the fee structure for 
the children of NRIs in colleges and universities in 
India.
04. [MASKED] promises to design and promote an NRI 
Invest Scheme to offer more opportunities and 
options to NRIs to invest in India. We will establish 
a single point of contact and simplify the proce-
dures to enable NRIs to invest in businesses in 
India.
05. [MASKED] promises autonomy to cultural  
institutions, including ﬁnancial autonomy.
06. We will promote art education in schools and 
colleges and support institutions that exclusively 
teach the arts. We will encourage more scholars to 
study archaeology and anthropology and provide 
more scholarships and fellowships.
07. [MASKED] will support government and private 
efforts to establish museums, art galleries, 
libraries and archives. [MASKED] will ensure that 
these institutions are easily accessible to children, 
students, historians and researchers. 
08. Every effort will be made to retrieve India’s  
stolen art.
09. [MASKED] will allocate sufﬁcient funds and support 
measures to create digital archives of India’s art 
and culture.
10. The Copyright Act will be strengthened and 
enforced. The Copyright Board will be reconstitut-
ed and empowered to achieve the objects of the 
Copyright Act.
11. The Archaeological Survey of India deserves and 
will be provided more funds and human resourc-
es. More historical monuments will be brought 
under the care and control of ASI.
Shaan—Pride in Our Hard and Soft Power  /  29


23
Engaging With Citizens and Civil Society
[MASKED] afﬁrms its belief that civil society organisations and groups are an important pillar of 
a parliamentary democracy. During the tenure of the [MASKED] Governments, civil society played a 
key role in developing our rights-based agenda. We will continue to engage with civil society 
activists and organisations and draw on their experience and knowledge.
01. [MASKED] promises to re-constitute the National 
Integration Council to promote unity, solidarity, 
communal harmony, fraternity and reconciliation. 
[MASKED] promises to work with the Council to ﬁght 
divisive and communal forces that are a danger to 
the unity and solidarity of the country.
02. [MASKED] will set up an Inter-faith Council 
consisting of leaders of all religions in order to 
promote respect for all religions, mutual toler-
ance and fraternity, to hold inter-faith dialogues, 
and enhance cultural exchanges between people 
belonging to different religions.
03. We will encourage citizens to form civil society 
organisations. We will create an institutional 
framework under which Central and State Govern-
ments may consult civil society organisations on 
formulating policies, implementing programmes 
and obtaining feedback on outcomes.
04. [MASKED] will use modern technology along with 
traditional brick-and-mortar service centres to 
increase the role of civil society organisations  
in policy and in decision-making.
[MASKED] will create an institutional 
framework under which Central and 
State Governments may consult 
civil society organisations.
Shaan—Pride in Our Hard and Soft Power  /  30


Sushasan— 
Good  
Governance 
Through 
Independent and 
Accountable 
Institutions
[MASKED] will restore the dignity, authority and autonomy of our public 
institutions, which has been eroded by the [MASKED] government, while making 
them accountable to Parliament. We believe that self-regulation is the 
best way to correct the abuse of media freedom. We will amend the Press 
Council of India Act, 1978 to strengthen the system of self-regulation, 
protect the freedom of journalists, uphold editorial independence and 
guard against government interference.
31


24
26
25
Institutions
Never before have the institutions that underpin a parliamentary democracy been so brazen-
ly undermined, denigrated and captured as in the last 5 years. Examples of this include the 
Reserve Bank of India, Central Vigilance Commission, Election Commission of India, Central 
Bureau of Investigation, Enforcement Directorate, Central Information Commission, National 
Statistics Commission and National Human Rights Commission.
Governance, Transparency and Accountability
Anti-Corruption
01. [MASKED] promises to restore the dignity, au-
thority and autonomy of these institutions while 
making them accountable to Parliament. [MASKED] 
promises that selection and appointment to these 
bodies will be transparent and will be with due 
regard to the importance of institutional integrity.
02. [MASKED] promises to amend the Anti-Defection 
Law to provide for instant disqualiﬁcation of a 
Member of Parliament or a Member of the State 
Legislature for proven disobedience to the party’s 
whip or for withdrawing allegiance to the party or 
for supporting another party. A disqualiﬁed mem-
ber shall not be eligible to hold any public ofﬁce 
(including that of minister) or be a candidate in an 
election to Parliament or the State Legislature for a 
period of 2 years from the date of disqualiﬁcation.
03. We will introduce the requirement of public con-
sultation before a Bill is introduced in Parliament.
04. All government schemes and programmes shall  
be subjected to social audit. [MASKED] promises  
to enact a Social Accountability Act.
05. [MASKED] promises to amend the Aadhaar Act, 
2016 in order to restrict the use of Aadhaar to 
subsidies, beneﬁts and services provided by the 
government as was originally intended under the 
law. [MASKED] also promises that, having regard 
to the inherent limitations of biometric identiﬁca-
tion, alternate instruments of identiﬁcation will be 
allowed under the law.
06. Appointments to the Lokpal will be made in accor-
dance with the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013. 
The Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha 
and, in the absence of such a leader, the leader of 
the largest Opposition Party will be a full-ﬂedged 
member of the selection committee.
01. In order to make governance more transparent, re-
sult-oriented and accountable, [MASKED] promises 
to place before the people, annually, a statement 
on the implementation of manifesto promises.
02. We will ensure that Social Audits of the pro-
grammes taken up for implementation are con-
ducted and placed before the people, at the end  
of every year, with a report card on achievements 
and what remains to be done.
03. [MASKED] will review the Right to Information 
Act, 2005 in the light of its working in the last  
14 years and omit provisions that may have dilut-
ed the Act and add provisions to strengthen the 
Act. In accordance with the letter and spirit of the 
Act, [MASKED] promises to appoint as Information 
Commissioners qualiﬁed persons drawn from dif-
ferent sections of the society.
04. We will introduce a Diversity Index as a metric 
to assess and ensure diversity in all government 
bodies, semi-government agencies, public sector 
enterprises and other public bodies.
05. [MASKED] promises to pass an Anti-Discrimination 
Law to prohibit discrimination on the basis of  
religion, caste, gender or language in the supply  
of goods and services that are made available  
to the public in general such as housing, hostels, 
hotels, clubs, etc.
06. [MASKED] will re-introduce and pass the Grievance 
Redressal Bill, 2011 to provide for mandatory, 
time-bound grievance redressal.
07. Rules under the Whistle-Blowers Protection 
Act, 2014 will be made to operationalise the Act. 
[MASKED] promises to ensure that the law is not 
weakened or diluted.
01. [MASKED] will enforce anti-corruption laws  
without discrimination
02. [MASKED] will cause to be investigated several 
deals entered into by the [MASKED] Government in the 
last 5 years and, in particular, the Rafale deal. 
03. [MASKED] will also investigate the circumstances 
under which a number of scamsters were allowed 
to leave the country and will take determined steps 
to bring them back and face legal proceedings.
Sushasan—Good Governance Through Independent and Accountable Institutions  /  32


27
28
Federalism and Centre-State Relations
A basic feature of the Constitution of India is the principle of federalism. [MASKED] acknowledges 
that, over the last 5 years, this principle has been eroded to the detriment of the States.
 
[MASKED] believes that a large country like India cannot be administered by the Central  
Government alone. In fact, in most matters concerning the daily lives of the people, it is the 
State Government that is close to the people and, in some matters, it is the Local Government  
(Municipality or Panchayat) that is even closer to the people.
Local Self Governments
[MASKED] was the proponent and author of the Constitution 73rd and 74th Amendments.  
Panchayati Raj lies at the core of good governance in our country, where the majority of  
citizens live outside metropolitan cities. [MASKED] promises to take further measures to 
strengthen the concept of Local Government—Panchayats and Municipalities.
01. We will review the distribution of legislative ﬁelds 
in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and 
build a consensus on transferring some legislative 
ﬁelds from List III (Concurrent List) to List II  
(State List).
02. We will reduce the size of Ministries and  
Departments in the Central Government in such 
areas where sufﬁcient capacity has been built by 
the State Governments. 
03. [MASKED] promises to give primacy to State  
Governments in subjects such as school educa-
tion, primary and secondary health care, child nu-
trition, drinking water, sanitation and distribution of 
electricity, and ensure that the Central Government 
plays a supportive role to State Governments.
04. [MASKED] promises to take forward the idea of 
the GST Council of Ministers and establish such 
Councils for Agriculture, Education and Healthcare.
05. We will implement the recommendations of the 
Fifteenth Finance Commission and will urge the 
States to implement the recommendations of their 
respective State Finance Commissions.
06. [MASKED], as the author of the 73rd and 74th  
Constitution Amendments, will prevail upon the 
States to implement those provisions in letter and 
spirit and devolve funds, functions and functionar-
ies upon the Panchayats and Municipalities.
07. We will work with State Governments to empower 
Panchayats and Municipalities through devolution 
of funds including a share of GST revenues. We 
will explore the possibility of direct central grants 
to Panchayats and Municipalities that was tried 
successfully in 1988-89 under the Government  
of Shri Rajiv Gandhi.
08. [MASKED] promises to revive the Backward  
Regions Grant Fund and the Integrated  
Action Plan that were implemented under  
[MASKED] and achieved signiﬁcant results.
09. The States in the North East have a special place 
and there are special provisions in the Constitution. 
For the North Eastern States, the [MASKED]  
promises to:
a. Restore Special Category status to the  
North Eastern States;
b. Withdraw the infamous Citizenship Amend-
ment Bill, which caused widespread resent-
ment;
c. Enhance ﬁnancial assistance to the Autono-
mous District Councils in acknowledgement  
of their importance to the North Eastern States.
10. [MASKED] will give Special Category status to 
Andhra Pradesh as promised by Dr. Manmohan 
Singh on 20 February 2014 in the Rajya Sabha.
11. [MASKED] promises full statehood to Puducherry.
12. [MASKED] promises to amend the Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 
to make it clear that the Lieutenant Governor shall 
act on the aid and advice of the Council of Minis-
ters except in matters concerning the 3 reserved 
subjects.
13. [MASKED] promises a statutory Council each for the 
Union Territories of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli to deliberate and to advise the Lieutenant 
Governor.
Sushasan—Good Governance Through Independent and Accountable Institutions  /  33


01. We will remove all provisions stipulating pre- 
qualiﬁcations (such as minimum education)  
for candidates at elections to local bodies.
02. [MASKED] will work with State Governments to 
ensure that a share of GST revenue is allocated 
to Panchayats and Municipalities.
03. [MASKED] promises to enhance the role and au-
thority of the Gram Sabhas in matters concerning 
the villages and Panchayats. [MASKED] will make 
it obligatory for the Gram Sabha to meet at least 
twice a year.
04. [MASKED] promises to ensure that the authority 
of the Gram Sabha under the following Acts is 
obeyed and upheld and the said Acts are imple-
mented in letter and spirit:
a. The Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) 
Act, 1996
b. The Forest Rights Act, 2006
c. The Land Acquisition Act, 2013
29
Judiciary
[MASKED] promises that the independence and integrity of the judiciary will be maintained  
and protected at all costs.
01. [MASKED] will introduce a Bill to amend the Con-
stitution to make the Supreme Court a Consti-
tutional Court that will hear and decide cases 
involving the interpretation of the Constitution 
and other cases of legal signiﬁcance or national 
importance.
02. [MASKED] will introduce a Bill to amend the Con-
stitution to establish a Court of Appeal between 
the High Courts and the Supreme Court, to hear 
appeals from judgments and orders of High Courts. 
The Court of Appeal will sit in multiple Benches of 
3 judges each in 6 locations.
03. We will enhance representation at all levels of 
the judiciary for women, SC, ST, OBC, minorities and 
other under-represented sections of society.
04. We will allocate sufﬁcient funds annually to pro-
vide the necessary infrastructure for the judiciary.
05. [MASKED] promises to ﬁx the retirement age of 
judges of High Courts and the Supreme Court at 
65 years. The retirement age for judicial members 
in Commissions and Tribunals shall also be 65 
years. This will prevent post-retirement assign-
ments for serving judges and allow more opportu-
nities for qualiﬁed persons to serve as judges  
or judicial members.
06. [MASKED] will work with the judiciary to improve the 
administration of courts by introducing modern 
technology and appointing professionals for court 
and roster management.
07. We will encourage the judiciary at all levels to 
adopt technological tools to track cases and 
expedite the hearing and decisions on cases.
08. Learned, independent and upright judges are the 
core of the judiciary. [MASKED] promises to es-
tablish a National Judicial Commission (NJC) 
that will be responsible for selection of judges for 
appointment to the High Courts and the Supreme 
Court. The NJC will be comprised of judges, jurists 
and parliamentarians and will be serviced by a 
secretariat. Names of suitable candidates will be 
placed in the public domain and the reasons for 
selection will be published to ensure that the en-
tire process is transparent. Once the new system is 
in place, we will endeavour to ﬁll every vacancy in 
the High Courts or Supreme Court within 2 months.
09. [MASKED] will establish, by law, an independent 
Judicial Complaints Commission to investigate 
complaints of misconduct against judges and rec-
ommend suitable action to Parliament. 
Sushasan—Good Governance Through Independent and Accountable Institutions  /  34


Review of Laws, Rules and Regulations
Freedom is the hallmark of our open and democratic Republic. The purpose of law is  
regulation in order to strengthen freedom. Laws must be just and reasonable and reﬂect  
our Constitutional values.
 
[MASKED] believes that we are an over-legislated and over-regulated country. Laws, Rules and 
Regulations have proliferated and restricted freedoms. Consequently, there are severe restric-
tions on innovation, enterprise and experimentation, and economic growth has suffered.
[MASKED] will initiate a total and comprehensive review of all laws, rules and regulations to:
a. Repeal instruments that are outdated or unjust or unreasonably restrict the freedoms  
of the people;
b. Amend instruments to bring them in accord with the Constitutional values  
of a democracy; and
c. Codify and reduce the number of instruments that must be complied with by a citizen. 
Speciﬁcally, [MASKED] promises to:
01. Decriminalise laws that are essentially laws direct-
ed against civil violations and can be subjected to 
civil penalties;
02. Omit Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code and 
make ‘defamation’ a civil offence;
03. Omit Section 124A of the Indian Penal Code  
(that deﬁnes the offence of ‘sedition’) that has 
been misused and, in any event, has become  
redundant because of subsequent laws;
04. Amend the laws that allow for detention without 
trial in order to bring them in accord with the  
spirit, and not just the letter, of the Constitution  
as well as International Human Rights Conventions;
05. Pass a law titled the Prevention of Torture Act  
to prohibit the use of third-degree methods  
during custody or interrogation and punish cases  
of torture, brutality or other police excesses;
06. Amend the Armed Forces (Special Powers)  
Act, 1958 in order to strike a balance between  
the powers of security forces and the human rights 
of citizens and to remove immunity for enforced 
disappearance, sexual violence and torture.
07. Amend the laws to declare that every investiga-
tion agency that has the power to search, seize, 
attach, summon, interrogate and arrest will be 
subject to the restrictions imposed on the police 
by the Constitution, the Code of Criminal Procedure 
and the Indian Evidence Act; and
08. Amend the Code of Criminal Procedure and  
related laws to afﬁrm the principle that ‘Bail is  
the rule and jail is the exception:’
09. At the administrative level, [MASKED] promises to:
a. Release immediately all remand and under 
trial prisoners facing charges punishable with 
imprisonment of 3 years or less who have spent 
3 months in prison;
b. Release immediately all remand and under 
trial prisoners facing charges punishable with 
imprisonment of 3 to 7 years who have spent  
6 months in prison; and
c. Institute comprehensive prison reforms  
recognizing the principle that prisoners enjoy 
human and legal rights and that prisons are 
institutions of correction.
[MASKED] will initiate a comprehensive 
review of all laws, rules and regulations 
to repeal instruments that are outdated 
or unjust or unreasonably restrict the 
freedoms of the people.
30
Sushasan—Good Governance Through Independent and Accountable Institutions  /  35


31
Electoral Reforms
The greatest challenge to free and fair elections is the Election Commission’s inability  
to prevent the use of black money in election campaigns and the use of inducements  
to inﬂuence voters. We will take steps to curb and eliminate this menace.
01. We will scrap the opaque Electoral Bond Scheme 
that was designed to favour the ruling party.
02. [MASKED] promises to set up a National Election 
Fund to which any person may make a contribu-
tion. Funds will be allocated at the time of elec-
tions to recognised political parties in accordance 
with criteria laid down by law.
03. [MASKED] will ensure that EVMs and VVPATs are 
tamperproof. During counting, the count in at 
least 50 per cent of the EVMs will be matched 
against the physical count of the voting slips in  
the corresponding VVPATs.
04. We will allocate substantially more free airtime  
on All India Radio and Doordarshan at the time  
of elections to recognised political parties in  
accordance with criteria laid down by law.
32
Police Reforms
01. ‘Police’ and ‘Law & Order’ are State subjects. Con-
gress promises to consult State Governments and 
reach a consensus on the police reforms directed 
by the Supreme Court in the Prakash Singh case. 
Based on the consensus, [MASKED] will pass a 
Model Police Act that the States will be advised 
to adopt and enact in the State Legislatures.
02. The objectives of the Model Police Act will be to 
make the police forces modern, technology- 
enabled, people-friendly, and upholders of  
human rights and legal rights.
03. Provisions will be made in the Model Police Act to:
a. Make the State police force accountable to an 
independent Police Accountability Commis-
sion as well as to give an annual report to the 
State Legislature.
b. Decentralise the police force in the State and 
to involve the community in the oversight of the 
police force.
c. Cause investigations into cases of communal ri-
ots, lynchings and gang rapes by a special wing 
of the State police under the direct command 
of the State Headquarters of the police.
04. [MASKED] promises to work with State Governments 
to augment the size of their police forces, to 
ﬁll current vacancies within 18 months and to lay 
down a schedule for annual recruitment, taking 
into account anticipated vacancies.
05. We will work with State Governments to ensure 
that their police forces reﬂect the diversity of the 
population of the State and gives greater represen-
tation to under-represented sections.
06. We will ensure that State police forces reserve 33 
per cent of all vacancies in direct recruitment and 
promotion for women constables and ofﬁcers.
Sushasan—Good Governance Through Independent and Accountable Institutions  /  36


01. In recent times, sections of the media have abused 
or surrendered their freedom. Nevertheless, we be-
lieve that self-regulation is the best way to correct 
the abuse of media freedom. [MASKED] promises to 
amend the Press Council of India Act, 1978 to 
strengthen the system of self-regulation, protect 
the freedom of journalists, uphold editorial indepen-
dence and guard against government interference.
02. [MASKED] will amend the Press Council of India 
Act to empower the Council to deal with the  
menace of fake news and paid news.
03. We will work with the Press Council of India and 
associations of newspapers and media to formu-
late and enforce a Code of Conduct on reporting 
in situations of natural disaster, communal conﬂict, 
riots, terrorist attacks and war in order to ensure  
a balance between the need to inform, need for  
restraint, maintenance of law and order, and  
interest of national security. 
04. [MASKED] will pass a law to curb monopolies in 
the media, cross-ownership of different segments 
of the media and control of the media by other 
business organisations. [MASKED] will refer cases  
of suspected monopolies to the Competition  
Commission of India.
05. [MASKED] promises to pass a law to preserve the 
freedom of the Internet and to prevent arbitrary 
and frequent shutdowns of the Internet.
06. We will work with State Governments to formulate 
rules to require the police to extend protection to 
journalists working in conﬂict areas or investi-
gating matters of public interest and to journalists 
whose lives are threatened or otherwise in danger.
07. [MASKED] promises to amend the Cinematograph 
Act, 1927 to restrict censorship of ﬁlms to 
grounds of national security and obscenity. We  
will direct the Central Board of Film Certiﬁcation  
to certify ﬁlms according to transparent and  
reasonable criteria.
34
Perspective Planning and The New Planning Commission
In a federal system comprising States and a Central Government with numerous ministries  
and departments administering speciﬁc subjects, it is necessary to have an expert body to 
a. Independently evaluate competing claims; 
b. Mediate between the Central and State Governments and between the Ministry of Finance 
and the various departments regarding allocation of funds; 
c. Monitor the utilisation of funds; and 
d. Assess and evaluate the gap between expenditure and outcomes. The Planning Commission 
performed these functions besides other functions. The [MASKED] Government’s decision to abol-
ish the Planning Commission was thoughtless and absurd.
01. [MASKED] will scrap the Niti Aayog, which has 
proved to be a noisy and incompetent intermed-
dler. [MASKED] promises to constitute a Planning 
Commission with re-deﬁned responsibilities such 
as to formulate medium and long-term perspective 
plans and to function as an independent expert 
body to perform crucial functions in a federal 
system.
02. [MASKED] promises that the new Planning Commis-
sion will be a lean organisation with renowned 
economists and ﬁnancial experts as members as-
sisted by a small but high-quality team of scholars 
from different ﬁelds and support staff totalling a 
maximum of 100 persons.
Media and Freedom of The Media
[MASKED] ﬁrmly believes that the media must be free and self-regulated. 
33
Sushasan—Good Governance Through Independent and Accountable Institutions  /  37


Swabhimaan—
Self-Esteem  
for  
The Deprived
[MASKED] will pass the Constitution (Amendment) Bill to provide for 
reservation of 33 per cent of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Legislative 
Assemblies in the ﬁrst session of the 17th Lok Sabha and in the Rajya 
Sabha. We will amend the Service Rules to reserve for women 33 per cent 
of appointments to posts in the Central Government.
38 


35
36
Women’s Empowerment and Gender Justice
Historically, [MASKED] has been at the forefront of the struggle for women’s rights, equality 
and empowerment. India’s only woman Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi, belonged to the 
[MASKED]. We passed many laws that empowered women. We mainstreamed gender in  
government schemes.
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other 
Backward Classes
The Constitution of India provides for reservation in employment and educational institutions 
for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. We must do even 
more to ensure justice to the historically disadvantaged sections of our people.
01. [MASKED] promises to pass the Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill to provide for reservation of  
33 per cent of seats in the Lok Sabha and State 
Legislative Assemblies in the ﬁrst session of the 
17th Lok Sabha and in the Rajya Sabha.
02. We will amend the Service Rules to reserve for 
women 33 per cent of appointments to posts  
in the Central Government.
03. The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 will be  
enforced effectively. We will review all laws that 
stipulate wage rates to provide that men and 
women are paid the same wage for similar work.
04. We will stipulate that every Special Economic Zone 
shall have working women’s hostels and safe 
transport facilities to increase the participation  
of women in the labour force.
05. We will repeal any provision of law that prohibits 
night shifts for women.
06. Sufﬁcient night shelters will be built for migrant 
women workers. Adequate number of safe and 
hygienic public toilets for women will be provided 
in towns and cities. Sanitary napkin vending  
machines will be installed in public spaces, 
schools and colleges.
07. [MASKED] promises a comprehensive review of the 
Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplaces 
Act, 2013 and will extend the Act to all work- 
places. We will additionally institute measures  
to address all forms of harassment of women.
08. [MASKED] will pass a model legislation to establish 
a separate investigative agency to investigate 
heinous crimes against women and children and 
urge State Governments to enact a law to establish 
such an investigative agency.
09. [MASKED] pioneered the women’s self-help group 
(SHG) movement that today boasts of 87 lakh 
groups. [MASKED] also launched the National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission (NRLM – Aajeevika). We prom-
ise to launch NRLM-2 to make SHGs a key instru-
ment for the economic empowerment of women, 
to increase livelihood opportunities and to usher  
in transformative social change.
10. We will work with State Governments to imple-
ment a programme to provide single, widowed, 
divorced, abandoned or destitute women a 
digniﬁed and secure life.
11. [MASKED] promises to launch a programme to ap-
point an Adhikar Maitri in every Panchayat to serve 
as a paralegal to educate women on, and assist 
them in the enforcement of, their legal rights.
12. We will pass suitable legislation to make  
registration of marriages compulsory and we  
will enforce the law prohibiting child marriages.
13. [MASKED] promises to expand ICDS and provide  
a crèche in every Anganwadi based on need  
and demand.
01. [MASKED] promises a holistic agenda of afﬁrmative 
action for SCs, STs and OBCs who constitute a little 
more than 75 per cent of the population. Hence, 
[MASKED] promises to set up an Equal Oppor-
tunities Commission, which will recommend 
afﬁrmative action strategies and policies to achieve 
equality—and equity—in education, employment 
and in economic opportunities. We will implement 
the recommendations of the Equal Opportunities 
Commission.
02. We will pass a law to restore the original purpose 
and intent of the 200-point roster system and 
implement it for the institution as a whole.
03. [MASKED] promises to ﬁll all backlog vacancies 
reserved for SCs, STs and OBCs in government, 
semi-government and central public sector organi-
sations within 12 months.
04. [MASKED] promises to amend the Constitution to 
provide for reservation in promotion posts for 
SCs, STs and OBCs.
Swabhimaan—Self-Esteem for The Deprived  /  39


05. [MASKED] will acquire panchami and mahar lands 
in the occupation of non-Dalits and distribute the 
lands to SCs and STs.
06. We will implement a scheme under which basic 
amenities such as water, sanitation, electricity and 
internal roads will be provided in every SC and ST 
habitation.
07. Special attention will be paid to the educational 
and health needs of the Scheduled Tribes.
08. We will increase the number and extend the Rajiv 
Gandhi National Fellowship, presently available 
to SCs and STs, to scholars belonging to the OBCs.
09. In order to enable SCs, STs and OBCs to compete 
as equals, [MASKED] will require public schools to 
offer English as a language of study in Classes 
VI to XII.
10. [MASKED] promises to pass a law to provide for  
reservation for SCs, STs and OBCs in private  
higher education institutions.
11. We will work with State Governments to review 
the curriculum of schools and include texts on 
the history and culture of SCs and STs and the 
contributions made by leaders belonging to these 
communities.
12. It will be our national mission to implement, in 
letter and spirit, the Forest Rights Act, 2006 and 
to secure for the Scheduled Tribes the rights guar-
anteed under the Act.
13. [MASKED] promises to remove the inconsistencies 
between the Forest Rights Act and the Compen-
satory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority Act, 2005 and to reafﬁrm  
the role of the Gram Sabha.
14. We promise a time-bound review of all IFR/CFR 
claims rejected under the Forest Rights Act and 
disposal within 6 months. Meanwhile, we will stop 
the eviction of the 18.9 lakh households that face 
imminent eviction.
15. We will establish a National Commission for 
Non-Timber Forest Produce and offer Minimum 
Support Prices for such produce to improve the 
livelihood and income of Adivasis.
16. Under the Afﬁrmative Action Programme, [MASKED] 
will ensure that a fair share of government pro-
curement and government contracts is given to 
SCs, STs and OBCs.
17. We will pass a law to require governments to 
transparently disclose in their budget documents 
the allocations to SCs and STs under the Special 
Component Plan for SCs and Tribal Sub-Plan 
for STs and to prohibit diversion of such funds.
37
Jammu & Kashmir
[MASKED] has stood witness to the developments in Jammu & Kashmir since the Instrument 
of Accession was signed on 26 October 1947. [MASKED] afﬁrms that the whole of Jammu & 
Kashmir is part of India. We also acknowledge the unique history of the State and the unique 
circumstances under which the State acceded to India that led to the inclusion of Article 370 in 
the Constitution of India. Nothing will be done or allowed to change the Constitutional position.
01. [MASKED] has long held the view that dialogue is 
the only way to understand the aspirations of the 
people of the 3 regions of Jammu & Kashmir and 
ﬁnd an honourable solution to their issues. We will 
take that path.
02. We will adopt a two-pronged approach: ﬁrst-
ly, uncompromising ﬁrmness on the border and 
ending inﬁltration; and secondly, absolute fairness 
in dealing with the demands of the people and 
winning their hearts and minds.
03. [MASKED] promises to review the deployment of 
armed forces, move more troops to the border to 
stop inﬁltration completely, reduce the presence 
of the Army and CAPFs in the Kashmir Valley, and 
entrust more responsibility to the J&K police for 
maintaining law and order.
04. The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act and 
the Disturbed Areas Act in J&K will be reviewed. 
Suitable changes will be made in the text of the 
laws to balance the requirements of security and 
the protection of human rights.
05. Building a Union of States that is India is a project 
of inclusiveness. Jammu & Kashmir and its prob-
lems deserve a large-hearted approach that will 
eschew muscular militarism and legalistic formu-
lations and look for an innovative federal solution. 
[MASKED] promises to ﬁnd such a solution through 
patient dialogue and talks with all stakeholders in 
the State.
06. [MASKED] promises the people of J&K talks without 
pre-conditions. We will appoint 3 interlocutors 
drawn from civil society to facilitate such talks.
Swabhimaan—Self-Esteem for The Deprived  /  40


07. We will renew the initiatives taken by the [MASKED]  
government such as UDAAN, HIMAYAT and  
UMMEED to impart training in skills and create  
economic opportunities for the youth of J&K.
08. Free and fair elections to the State Legislative 
Assembly will be held immediately.
09. We are deeply concerned about the cases of  
discrimination and harassment of students, 
traders and others belonging to Jammu & Kashmir 
in the rest of India and we will ensure their safety 
and their right to study or do business.
38
North Eastern States
[MASKED] afﬁrms that the North Eastern States (NES) are a unique and valued part of India 
that bring into our Union many diverse and rich cultures, languages, traditions and bio-diver-
sity. We are committed to defending and protecting the interests of the NES and their people 
and to ensuring the rapid economic development of the region.
01. [MASKED] promises to restore the Special Catego-
ry status to the NES.
02. [MASKED] promises an industrial policy for the 
NES.
03. We will withdraw immediately the widely resented 
Citizenship Amendment Bill introduced by the 
[MASKED] Government against the wishes of the people 
of the NES.
04. We will ensure that no citizen of India is denied in-
clusion in the ﬁnal National Register of Citizens.
05. We will address the issue of illegal immigra-
tion into the NES through consultation with the 
NES and evolve a consensus on the legislative 
measures that will secure the identity of the 
indigenous communities. We will also engage the 
neighbouring countries, Bangladesh and Myanmar, 
to address and resolve the issue of illegal immi-
gration into India.
06. [MASKED] will strengthen the security of the bor-
ders of the NES with Bangladesh, Myanmar and 
China, resolve any border issues through dialogue 
with the neighbouring countries and make the bor-
ders ‘borders of prosperity and growth;’ and
07. We will resolve the pending inter-state issues, 
including boundary issues, in the NES through 
dialogue or mediation.
08. The importance of border trade to the economy 
of the NES cannot be overstated. Regular export 
and import trade will also create huge economic 
opportunities, including more jobs, in the NES. 
We promise to take bold and innovative measures 
to enhance trade in general, and border trade in 
particular, with neighbouring countries and other 
countries further to the east.
09. [MASKED] will strengthen the North Eastern  
Council and take steps to expand and reinforce  
the original mandate of the Council.
10. We will cause a comprehensive review of the 
policies and special programmes that are under 
implementation in the NES and make changes 
wherever necessary.
11. [MASKED] promises to substantially increase the 
budget outlays for infrastructure and social 
sector development in the NES, especially for 
railways, roads, communication, connectivity and 
tourism. We will provide sufﬁcient funds to address 
the development gaps in education and healthcare.
12. We will leverage the rich bio-diversity and natural 
resources of the NES to generate livelihood oppor-
tunities in sustainable agriculture, horticulture 
and organic farming.
13. We will use modern technology to harness the wa-
ters of the Brahmaputra and to ﬁnd a permanent 
solution to the problems of ﬂood and soil erosion. 
We will examine the opportunity provided by the 
mighty Brahmaputra to create a multi-modal trans-
port system in the North Eastern region.
14. [MASKED] acknowledges the importance of  
Autonomous District Councils within the NES 
and promises to enhance ﬁnancial assistance to 
these Councils. 
15. We will ensure that tea garden workers are paid 
wages and given other beneﬁts in accordance with 
the laws applicable to them and according to the 
bilateral agreements.
Swabhimaan—Self-Esteem for The Deprived  /  41


39
Religious And Linguistic Minorities
The strength and vibrancy of a true democracy are often judged by the rights and protection 
accorded to its minorities. In the last 5 years under the [MASKED] Government, hate crimes and 
atrocities against the minorities and other vulnerable sections of the people have increased 
manifold. The perpetrators of these crimes walk on the streets with impunity.
01. [MASKED] promises to uphold the rights of reli-
gious minorities: to non-discrimination, to equal 
opportunity in employment, to religious freedom 
and to establish educational institutions guaran-
teed under Articles 15, 16, 25, 26, 28, 29 and 30 
of the Constitution.
02. We also promise to uphold the rights of linguistic 
minorities: to non-discrimination, to equal oppor-
tunity in employment and to establish educational 
institutions guaranteed under Articles 15, 16, 29 
and 30 of the Constitution.
03. [MASKED] promises that rules will be made to 
ensure that the decennial census accurately 
enumerates the number of people claiming a lan-
guage as their mother tongue or as their preferred 
spoken language.
04. [MASKED] promises to support the promotion of all 
the languages of our country including languages 
not included in the Eighth Schedule of the Consti-
tution. We will encourage, as far as possible, the 
use of such languages, including the languages 
of Scheduled Tribes and Nomadic Tribes, in the 
administration of areas where such languages are 
widely spoken by the people.
05. We support the use of Sign Language that is  
used by millions of people with disabilities.
06. [MASKED] supports the principle that school educa-
tion is best imparted in the mother tongue of the 
child and promises to support the efforts of State 
Governments to promote the use of the mother 
tongue as the preferred medium of instruction.
07. We will also support the efforts of State Govern-
ments to teach the ofﬁcial language(s) of the 
State, as well as Hindi and English to children of 
that State.
08. We will pass a new law in the ﬁrst session of the 
17th Lok Sabha and in the Rajya Sabha to prevent 
and punish hate crimes such as mob-engineered 
stripping, burning and lynching. The law will con-
tain provisions to compensate the victims and to 
hold accountable the police and district administra-
tion for proven negligence.
09. The Waqf Properties (Eviction of Unauthorized 
Occupants) Bill, 2014 will be re-introduced and 
passed. Waqf properties will be restored to the 
legal trustees.
10. [MASKED] promises to uphold the character of 
Aligarh Muslim University and Jamia Millia 
Islamia as minority educational institutions.
11. We promise that the National Commission for 
Women and the National Commission for  
Minorities will be given Constitutional status  
as in the cases of similar Commissions.
[MASKED] will pass a new law in the 
ﬁrst session of the 17 th Lok Sabha 
and in the Rajya Sabha to prevent 
and punish hate crimes.
Swabhimaan—Self-Esteem for The Deprived  /  42


40
41
42
Denotiﬁed Tribes and Semi-Nomadic Tribes
Denotiﬁed and Semi-Nomadic Tribes have long suffered discrimination and neglect. [MASKED] 
believes that it is the duty of the Central and State Governments to reach out to these groups 
and correct these injustices.
Senior Citizens
[MASKED] acknowledges that about 9 per cent of the population of India is over the age  
of 60 years and this proportion will increase.
 
[MASKED] promises to review current policies on senior citizens and make suitable changes, 
taking into account advances in medical science and technology.
Persons With Disabilities
By one estimate, there are 4 crore people in India who are persons with disabilities. [MASKED] is 
ﬁrmly committed to upholding the rights, dignity and self-respect of persons with disabilities. 
We promise a fair deal for persons with disabilities and opportunities for them to be employed, 
productive and contributing to the welfare of their families and to the progress of our nation.
01. [MASKED] promises a Special Census and the  
enumeration of Denotiﬁed and Semi-Nomadic 
Tribes and the integration of the data in the  
decennial census.
02. We will examine the feasibility of providing 
compartmental reservation for Denotiﬁed and 
Semi-Nomadic Tribes as citizens belonging to  
socially and educationally Backward Classes.
03. We will immediately repeal the Habitual  
Offenders Act, 1952 that has discriminated 
against and stigmatised Denotiﬁed and Semi- 
Nomadic Tribes and led to their harassment.
04. [MASKED] will work with State Governments to 
impart education and skills to Denotiﬁed and 
Semi-Nomadic Tribes, especially the children, in 
order that they may ﬁnd productive jobs and reap 
the beneﬁts of economic development.
01. Under the Right to Healthcare Act, we will 
provide affordable and quality healthcare to senior 
citizens in hospitals including free diagnostics, 
out-patient treatment, medicines and hospital 
treatment. Geriatric wards with sufﬁcient beds will 
be opened in every district-level hospital.
02. We will introduce well-designed pension and 
health insurance schemes that will guarantee 
insured persons a life of dignity and comfort when 
they become senior citizens.
03. Senior citizens can contribute to the development 
of the communities in which they live. We will  
create opportunities for senior citizens to do so.
04. We will take measures to ensure easy access to 
legal services and recourse to senior citizens es-
pecially in cases of neglect, abuse, abandonment, 
eviction and ﬁnancial fraud.
05. [MASKED] promises to enforce strictly the provi-
sions of the Maintenance and Welfare of Senior 
Citizens Act, 2017.
01. Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution will be 
amended to prohibit discrimination on the ground 
of ‘disability’ or ‘impairment.’
02. All public services and public spaces, govern-
ment ofﬁces and private premises will be made in-
clusive and accessible to persons with disabilities.
03. We will set up an information portal to enable 
easy access to information on all 21 disabilities 
included in the Right of Persons with Disabilities  
Act, 2016 and to create awareness on the rights  
of persons with disabilities.
04. [MASKED] promises to direct all Ministries and  
Departments to cause a quick review of their  
policy statements and programmes in order to  
ensure that they acknowledge, protect and  
promote the rights of persons with disabilities.
Swabhimaan—Self-Esteem for The Deprived  /  43


05. We will propose an Amendment to the  
Constitution to recognise the Braille script  
and Sign Language as languages.
06. We will establish a National Centre of Research 
and Excellence for Special Education to ensure 
that quality education is imparted to children with 
special needs and children with disabilities.
07. [MASKED] promises to commission an annual  
social audit of policies and programmes for  
persons with disabilities.
08. All assistive and adaptive aids, appliances  
and devices will be zero-rated under the GST  
2.0 regime.
43
Rights Of LGBTQIA+
[MASKED] recognises the sexual diversity among people and promises equality  
and equal rotection of the laws to people with different sexual identities.
01. [MASKED] promises to ensure the effective imple-
mentation of the judgment in the Navtej Singh 
Johar case. We will protect the rights of the 
LGBTQIA+ community.
02. We will immediately withdraw the Transgender 
Bill, 2018, pending in Parliament. Instead, Con-
gress will introduce a Bill that will be consistent 
with the judgment in the NALSA case. The new Bill 
will be drafted in consultation with the LGBTQIA+ 
community.
03. We will direct that gender sensitivity training, 
especially for the rights of the LGBTQIA+  
community, be made mandatory in all government  
departments and organisations including the 
Armed Forces and the Police Forces.
Swabhimaan—Self-Esteem for The Deprived  /  44


Samman— 
A Life of  
Dignity  
For All
[MASKED] promises to enact the Right to Healthcare Act that will guarantee 
to every citizen the right to healthcare services, including free diagnostics, 
out-patient care, medicines and hospitalisation through a network of public 
hospitals and enlisted private hospitals. We will ensure that government 
expenditure on healthcare and education will be doubled to 3 per cent of 
GDP and 6 per cent of GDP respectively by 2023–24.
45


44
Healthcare
Healthcare, is a public good. Full healthcare is the right of every citizen— 
child, adult and senior citizen.
 
Providing healthcare is a shared responsibility of the Central and State Governments. We  
recognise that the principal responsibility for providing primary and secondary healthcare  
lies with the State Governments and the principal responsibility for providing tertiary and  
super-specialty healthcare lies with the Central Government.
01. [MASKED] promises that the total government 
expenditure on healthcare will be doubled to  
3 per cent of GDP by the year 2023-24. The  
Annual Budgets will indicate the step up in each 
year in order to achieve the target in 2023-24.
02. [MASKED] promises to enact the Right to Health-
care Act that will guarantee to every citizen  
the right to healthcare services, including free 
diagnostics, out-patient care, medicines and  
hospitalisation through a network of public  
hospitals and enlisted private hospitals.
03. We are of the ﬁrm belief that the insurance-based 
model cannot be the preferred model to provide 
universal healthcare in our country. [MASKED]  
promises to vigorously promote and implement  
the free public hospitals-model to provide  
universal healthcare.
04. [MASKED] will substantially expand the free  
Dial-an-Ambulance service and put on the  
road more ambulances in all the districts of India.
05. Trauma and Emergency Centres will be estab-
lished on all National and State Highways to cater 
to the travelling public as well as the population 
in the surrounding area.
06. We will expand child healthcare services 
(pre-natal, post-natal and pediatric) and geriatric 
services in all public hospitals.
07. We will implement the Clinical Establishments 
Act, 2010 to bring accountability to the function-
ing of private and public clinical establishments.
08. [MASKED] promises to promote, and eventually 
mandate, the digitisation of medical records 
on the foundation of a robust ICT infrastructure 
with suitable provisions for privacy, mobility and 
inter-operability.
09. We promise to formulate a National Telemedi-
cine Policy based on international best practices.
10. India’s current doctor to population ratio is 1:1681 
and government doctor to population ratio is 
1:11,528. [MASKED] promises to increase the 
number of doctors, including specialist doctors, 
signiﬁcantly by establishing more medical  
colleges, increasing the capacity of medical  
colleges and providing scholarships and loans  
to medical students.
11. [MASKED] promises to license pre-qualiﬁed  
institutions in the public sector and private sector 
to teach and certify medical professionals such  
as nurses, paramedics and medical technicians.
12. We will promote AYUSH, the Indian systems of 
medicine, in the provision of healthcare services 
and especially in preventive healthcare.
13. [MASKED] will implement a programme that will  
enable State Governments to revamp and equip 
the network of primary health centres (PHCs). 
PHCs will provide all primary health services,  
including preventive measures and wellness 
services, and become referral centres for serious 
medical cases.
14. We will ensure that all vacancies at all levels  
in PHCs and in public hospitals are ﬁlled within  
a period of 1 year.
15. We will expand the ASHA programme and  
appoint a second ASHA worker in all villages  
with a population exceeding 2500 persons.
16. [MASKED] promises to implement the National 
Mental Health Policy, 2014 and the Mental 
Health Care Act, 2017 in letter and spirit. We  
will ensure that mental healthcare professionals 
are appointed in all public district hospitals and 
that mental healthcare services are provided in 
such hospitals.
Samman—A Life of Dignity For All  /  46


45
Education
Education is a merit good and must be available to all children as a public good. [MASKED] 
promises that State and Central Governments shall be responsible for providing educational 
opportunities to all children. Schools, colleges and universities shall be, mostly, public institu-
tions funded through public resources. Private educational institutions may supplement public 
educational institutions.
01. [MASKED] will propose that School Education  
be transferred to the State List in the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution while retaining the 
subject of Higher Education in the Union List.
02. [MASKED] promises that school education from 
Class I to Class XII in public schools shall be 
compulsory and free. Suitable amendments will 
be made in the Right to Education Act, 2009. We 
will end the practice of charging special fees for 
different purposes in public schools.
03. We are deeply concerned about the quality of ed-
ucation and poor learning outcomes as reported 
in the Annual Survey of Education Report (ASER). 
[MASKED] promises to attach the highest impor-
tance to learning outcomes.
04. The teacher is the pivot around whom the entire 
system of education revolves. Teacher training 
and the continuing education of teachers are the 
key to quality instruction. [MASKED] promises to 
increase the capacity, number and quality of Teach-
er Training Institutes set up by the government. 
Regulation of Teacher Training Institutes will be the 
responsibility of the National Council for Teacher 
Education and their funding will be the responsi-
bility of the University Grants Commission or its 
successor. A scheme for the periodic and continu-
ing education of teachers will be implemented and 
teachers will be required to mandatorily participate 
in the scheme.
05. [MASKED] promises to double the allocation for 
Education to 6 per cent of GDP in the 5 years 
ending 2023-24. A path forward will be laid down 
in the regular Budget for 2019-20 and speciﬁc 
annual targets will be set.
06. The Right to Education Act brought to the fore criti-
cal deﬁciencies in the school systems across the 
country. In States where the Act was implemented 
well, many of these deﬁciencies were rectiﬁed. But 
much remains to be done, especially in the educa-
tionally backward districts of the States. [MASKED] 
promises increased expenditure to provide basic 
and adequate infrastructure in every school from 
Class I to Class XII that will include classrooms, 
library, laboratory, playground, toilets, drinking 
water, etc. Hostels will be constructed based  
on demand.
07. [MASKED] promises to increase the number of  
Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodya Vidyalayas 
based on demand and with the co-operation  
of the State Governments.
08. It is a matter of grave concern that children drop 
out of school. We promise to arrest this trend and 
ensure that every child completes 12 years of 
school education.
09. In order to ensure a uniform quality of education 
and to improve learning outcomes, [MASKED] prom-
ises to employ technology-enabled teaching 
methods and technology-driven, personalised and 
adaptive learning tools in all schools.
10. Most children stop with school education. In 
order to make children ready for employment or 
self-employment, [MASKED] promises to introduce 
vocational training as a compulsory component 
of school education in Classes IX to XII.
11. [MASKED] will support the establishment of  
special schools for children with special needs.
12. India needs more Universities. [MASKED] promises 
to establish more public universities in the country, 
especially in under-served areas.
13. We promise to restore the autonomy of colleges 
and universities. 
14. We will entrust the Regulation, Grading and 
Funding of colleges and universities to sepa-
rate organisations. We will provide The University 
Grants Commission or its successor with sufﬁcient 
funds to make liberal grants to colleges and uni-
versities, based on need and merit.
15. We promise to take suitable measures to include 
Guest, Temporary and Contract Teachers in the 
regular establishment of Universities so that they 
receive the beneﬁts due to them.
16. We promise to restore the 200-point roster  
system for appointments to central universities 
and other central institutes of higher learning.
17. [MASKED] deeply respects teachers and will  
ensure that serving teachers are represented in  
the governing bodies of colleges and universities.
18. [MASKED] promises to establish more Institutes 
of Higher Learning in subjects such as medicine, 
engineering, commerce, management and pure 
sciences.
19. We will increase the Gross Enrollment Ratio 
(GER) in Higher Education from the current level  
of 25.8 to the level of at least 40 in a period of  
5 years. 
Samman—A Life of Dignity For All  /  47


20. The NEET examination is discriminatory against 
students from certain States. In addition, it inter-
feres with the State Government’s right to admit 
students domiciled in the State to medical colleges 
in that State. Hence, we will take measures to 
dispense with the NEET examination and substi-
tute it with a State-level examination of equivalent 
standard, approved by the competent authority for 
admission to medical colleges in that State. 
21. Colleges and Universities will be encouraged to 
award Deprivation Points to students seeking 
admission based on gender, permanent residence 
in rural districts, ﬁrst generation learner, etc. and 
to admit such students to ensure diversity in the 
classroom.
22. College and University education must be fund-
ed in multiple ways. We promise to increase the 
amount earmarked for grants to colleges and 
universities.
23. [MASKED] promises to increase the number of 
scholarships offered to students. Colleges and 
universities will be encouraged to build endow-
ment funds to support deserving poor students.
24. We will revive, redesign and expand the Education 
Loan programme. Applications will be received, 
examined and sanctioned on a single portal and 
then assigned to the branch of a bank located 
near the applicant’s residence or place of study for 
documentation and monitoring. No interest will be 
charged during the period of study and until the 
student ﬁnds a job or earns through self-employ-
ment. Outstanding interest dues on old education 
loans as on 31 March 2019 will be waived.
25. [MASKED] will pass a Students Rights Bill to  
codify the rights and obligations of students  
in colleges and universities.
46
Food and Nutrition Security
The passage of the National Food Security Act, 2013 by the [MASKED] Government was a revolu-
tionary step that linked Wealth (the Green Revolution) to Welfare (assurance of food security).
Samman—A Life of Dignity For All  /  48


01. [MASKED] promises to work tirelessly to assure 
food security to all.
02. Some Tribal communities and groups are partic-
ularly vulnerable. We will pay special attention to 
them and ensure that food grains are delivered to 
them through mobile fair price shops.
03. We will review and update the list of beneﬁcia-
ries within 6 months. Care shall be taken to in-
clude the homeless, destitute persons and migrant 
workers. No eligible person shall be excluded.
04. [MASKED] promises to take special measures to 
enroll vulnerable tribal groups and tribal com-
munities.
05. [MASKED] will ensure that the linking of Aadhaar 
will be voluntary but encouraged. No one shall  
be excluded because of non-linking of Aadhaar.
06. The quality and delivery of the Mid-Day Meal 
Scheme will be improved. Milk and eggs shall be 
included in the meal. The cost allowed for a Mid-
Day Meal shall be increased. There will be a social 
audit of the scheme at the block and district levels 
and the outcomes, in terms of nutrition levels of 
the children, will be measured and monitored.
07. The public food distribution programmes  
(Mid-Day Meal Scheme, ICDS etc.) will rely, as  
far as possible, on fresh produce. This will  
encourage local production and provide a ﬁllip  
to local markets.
47
48
Child Welfare
Children are the most valuable human resource of a country. [MASKED] believes that it is the 
duty of the Central and State Governments to ensure that every child enjoys all the rights of  
a child, especially complete education and full health.
Water Management, Sanitation and Hygiene
Access to water and sanitation are basic human rights. [MASKED] promises to address  
the challenges of water and sanitation through advocacy, technology and legislation.
01. [MASKED] promises to expand the ICDS pro-
gramme, increase funding support and increase 
the number of Anganwadis. Anganwadi workers 
shall be paid atleast the State minimum wage.
02. Based on need and demand, Anganwadis will 
include a crèche to provide day care to small  
children and to empower working mothers.
03. Nutritious food is the mainstay of the ICDS  
programme. We will closely monitor the coverage 
and quality of the programme. There will be a 
social audit of the outcomes pertaining to the 
improvement of children’s nutrition levels.
04. We will ensure that every child is vaccinated.
05. Complete education is dependent on learning 
outcomes and the child completing 12 years  
of school education. The ASER Report is an indict-
ment of the quality of instruction in many schools. 
[MASKED] will work with State Governments to en-
sure that a child receives a good quality education 
and that this is reﬂected in learning outcomes.
06. Crimes against children, especially sexual 
violence, are crimes against humanity. [MASKED] 
promises to take a serious view of such crimes. The 
number of POCSO courts will be increased, trials 
will be put on fast track and the guilty punished.
07. [MASKED] promises to revamp and improve  
Child Protection Services with a focus on  
vulnerable groups of children, the prevention  
of crimes against children, and the after-care  
and rehabilitation of child victims.
01. [MASKED] promises universal access to potable 
drinking water. The National Drinking Water  
Mission will be reviewed and strengthened.  
Budget allocations will be substantially increased.
02. [MASKED] recognises the challenge of water scarcity 
and promises to create a Ministry of Water to 
bring all water-related activities and departments 
under one authority.
03. We will pay special attention to access to water 
and democratic sharing of water. We will address 
these issues by focusing on storage in dams and 
water bodies, replenishing ground water and 
creating a large participatory programme of water 
management involving the State Governments, 
civil society organisations, farmers, other users, 
Panchayats and Gram Sabhas.
Samman—A Life of Dignity For All  /  49


04. [MASKED] promises to double the budget allocation 
for cleaning rivers, including the Ganga. [MASKED] 
promises to review the current methodology for 
cleaning rivers and to strengthen efforts by em-
ploying the latest advances in science and technol-
ogy. We will convert the Ganga Action Plan into a 
People’s Programme and implement the same.
05. [MASKED] will review and re-introduce the Nirmal 
Bharat Abhiyan (NBA) to ensure universal access 
to a clean, functioning toilet with water. Instead of 
chasing numbers, [MASKED] promises that NBA will 
support the construction of individual toilets (that 
will be the responsibility of the household) as well 
as community toilets (that will be the responsibili-
ty of pre-qualiﬁed NGOs).
06. We will implement a comprehensive plan for  
the treatment and safe disposal of sewage.
07. [MASKED] promises to focus on hygiene, including 
menstrual hygiene, by promoting hand washing, 
use of disposable tissue paper and low-cost  
sanitary napkins. Panchayats, Municipalities and 
NGOs will be supported to install sanitary napkin 
vending machines in schools, colleges and select 
public places.
08. [MASKED] promises to end the evil of manual 
scavenging in 3 years. Every manual scavenger 
will be rehabilitated, re-skilled, provided a job and 
assured a life of dignity and safety. The Prohibition 
of Manual Scavenging Act, 2013 will be strictly 
implemented and any person employing anyone 
for manual scavenging shall be punished. We will 
allocate sufﬁcient funds to enable the procurement 
of machines that will clean sewers and septic tanks 
and remove human waste.
49
Environment And Climate Change
[MASKED] was the ﬁrst Indian political party to acknowledge the consequences of  
Climate Change (Smt. Indira Gandhi in Stockholm on 14 June 1972).
 
It is a bitter truth that India’s environment has deteriorated. The 2018 Global Environmental 
Performance Index placed India at rank 177 out of 180 countries. The [MASKED] Government has 
done virtually nothing in the last 5 years to arrest this decline.
01. [MASKED] promises an action agenda that will place 
India at the forefront of the battle against global 
warming and for the protection of the environ-
ment. At the same time, [MASKED] will defend and 
advance India’s interests in international negotia-
tions on Climate Change and the Environment.
02. We will constitute, by law, an independent, em-
powered and transparent Environment Protection 
Authority (EPA) to establish, monitor and enforce 
environmental standards and regulations. The EPA 
will replace all other bodies that currently exercise 
jurisdiction and powers.
03. [MASKED] recognises that air pollution is a 
national public health emergency. We will 
signiﬁcantly strengthen the National Clean Air Pro-
gramme in order to urgently tackle the problem of  
pollution. All major sources of emission will be 
targetted, mitigated and reduced to acceptable 
levels. Sectoral emission standards will be set.
04. We will formulate a comprehensive land and  
water use policy and plan that will include  
measures for the conservation of ecosystems  
and the bio-diversity and wildlife contained  
therein, without affecting the legitimate rights  
of local communities. 
05. We will work closely with the State Governments 
concerned to preserve the rich bio-diversity of 
the Himalayan range and the Western Ghats. 
However, the livelihood opportunities of the people 
living in these mountains will be protected.
06. [MASKED] will join hands with State Governments to 
stop, fully and ﬁnally, the discharge of efﬂuents 
into the rivers and to clean all the rivers of India.
07. [MASKED] promises to protect the coastal zones  
of the country. Recent steps that diluted the coast-
al zone regulations will be reversed. The coast 
will be preserved without affecting the livelihood 
opportunities of ﬁshing communities.
08. We will impose a complete ban on the import  
of all types of waste.
09. We will allow the import of sand for construction 
and stop the illegal mining of sand in riverbanks.
10. We will implement a solid waste management 
plan in every habitation, village, town and city 
employing modern technology and machinery. 
Those engaged in waste management and disposal 
will be assured appropriate equipment, dignity and 
safe working conditions. 
11. [MASKED] will confer legal and ﬁnancial powers 
upon Panchayats and Municipalities to enable  
them to partner with State Governments in envi- 
ronment protection and management and to 
convert the total effort into a grassroots movement 
involving youth, women, communities and NGOs.
Samman—A Life of Dignity For All  /  50


12. [MASKED] promises to amend laws governing  
forests, re-deﬁne the role of the Forest Depart-
ments and make local communities the  
custodians of forests and shareholders of  
forest resources.
13. We will work with State Governments to increase 
the forest cover from the current level of 21  
per cent to 25 per cent by the year 2025 and, 
towards that goal, take the following steps:
a. Re-deﬁne the words and phrase ‘forest’ and  
‘forest cover’ in accordance with modern  
scientiﬁc standards;
b. Assess the exact forest cover at the  
district level;
c. Involve local communities in afforestation  
projects and the selection of species of  
plants; and
d. Prohibit and penalise the diversion of funds  
for forest conservation and afforestation.
14. [MASKED] promises to preserve wildlife habitats 
and manage and minimise human—wildlife  
conﬂict and award compensation for the loss  
of human lives.
15. We will promote the welfare of animals  
and severely penalise cruelty to animals.
16. [MASKED] promises to provide clean cooking fuels 
at affordable prices to all the households of the 
country. We will monitor the price of LPG cylinders 
and mitigate through subsidies the burden of price 
increases on the homemaker.
17. We will present the national accounts in a form 
that will account for the costs of environmental 
degradation and damage. The Annual Budget will 
adopt the core principles of Green Budgeting.
18. [MASKED] will endeavour to make India a green 
manufacturing hub. We will reduce tariffs and 
lift trade barriers for clean technology and provide 
incentives for the adoption of such technologies.
50
Climate Resilience and Disaster Management
It is not possible to eradicate poverty without tackling the dual threats of climate change 
and natural disasters. It is the poor who suffer most on account of natural disasters and 
climate change.
01. [MASKED] promises to re-visit the National  
Disaster Management Act, 2005 and incorporate 
changes, based upon the experience gained in the 
working of the Act and in managing natural disas-
ters that have occurred over the last 14 years.
02. We will review the working of the National Disas-
ter Management Authority and emphasise the 
equally important function of preventing disasters.
03. We will not limit disaster management to  
humans and will include it to cover the impact  
of disasters on wild animals, domestic animals, 
pets, livestock, agricultural crops and plantations.
04. We will use the MGNREGA programme to execute 
public works that will mitigate the impact of  
disasters such as ﬂoods and droughts.
05. [MASKED] promises to develop a modern Climate 
Information System, incorporating advanced 
tools of meteorology that will accurately monitor, 
forecast and disseminate information to key stake-
holders including farmers, ﬁsherfolk and vulnerable 
households.
06. We will increase the allocation to the National  
Adaptation Fund and re-visit the guidelines  
for the use of the funds to ensure that only 
schemes that actually beneﬁt farmers, ﬁsherfolk, 
forest dwellers, artisans and similar persons  
are implemented.
[MASKED] promises an action agenda 
that will place India at the forefront of 
the battle against global warming and 
for the protection of the environment. 
Samman—A Life of Dignity For All  /  51


51
52
Digital Rights of Every Citizen
[MASKED] afﬁrms its belief that every Indian shall enjoy digital rights and freely access the 
digital world. [MASKED] promises to:
Sports
[MASKED] afﬁrms its belief that India has the potential to become a great sporting nation. Our 
sports policy will aim to inculcate in our citizens, especially students and youth, the culture of 
sports and ﬁtness and will encourage sports as a career.
01. Provide access to all persons to high quality 
internet at affordable rates;
02. Uphold the principle of net neutrality to ensure 
the internet stays a level playing ﬁeld;
03. Regulate the power to shut down the internet 
and to prevent arbitrary shut downs;
04. Promote the development and use of open stan-
dards and free and open source software in 
order to enable citizens to avail of government  
services and access government information with-
out being obliged to rely on proprietary software;
05. Pass a law to protect the personal data of all  
persons and uphold the right to privacy;
06. Pass a law to provide adequate safeguards against 
unlawful or excessive surveillance and monitor-
ing and provide for both independent and Parlia-
mentary oversight;
07. Make all government departments publish all 
non-private data sets as open data, allowing 
citizens to access the data without having to ﬁle 
RTI requests; and
08. Pass regulations to stop the spread of fake news 
and hate speech and punish those who misuse 
digital and social media.
01. [MASKED] promises to respect the autonomy of the 
Indian Olympic Association and the Apex Body  
of each sport. Government will work with each 
body to promote the sport concerned.
02. [MASKED] will take suitable measures to ensure 
that the Constitution of each sports body is in 
accordance with certain norms and principles, that 
elections are held according to them, and that 
there is adequate representation in each sports 
body for active players, former players and women.
03. We will make physical education and sports an 
integral and mandatory part of the school curricu-
lum and encourage higher education institutions  
to accord sports an important place. 
04. [MASKED] promises to allocate sufﬁcient funds to 
create modern sports infrastructure in different 
parts of the country such as multi-sport stadium, 
athletic track, football ﬁeld, astro-turf, tennis, 
badminton, basketball and volleyball courts, gym-
nasium, swimming pool and velodrome. We will 
entrust the maintenance and management of  
each facility to the Apex Body of that sport.
05. [MASKED] will allocate sufﬁcient funds to train  
and produce coaches and other technical support 
personnel in each sport.
06. [MASKED] promises to establish Centres of Sport-
ing Excellence in different parts of the country 
in order to offer world-class training and coaching 
facilities to sportspersons who meet national or 
international standards of excellence.
07. We will ensure that there is at least 1 community 
sports centre in the headquarters of each block 
and in municipal towns and at least 1 multi-sport 
coaching centre in every district headquarters.
08. [MASKED] will ensure that there is at least 1 Sports 
Counselling Centre in every district that will 
spread awareness about different sports and  
counsel and assist aspiring young sportspersons.
09. We will allocate sufﬁcient funds to promote 
sports among girls and women, persons with 
disabilities and disadvantaged groups such as 
Scheduled Tribes.
Samman—A Life of Dignity For All  /  52


Appeal
India has suffered terribly over the last 5 years.  
We are stuck in a sluggish economy; we are stuck in 
joblessness; we are stuck in an unprecedented rural 
crisis; we are stuck in a divided society; and we are 
stuck in an atmosphere of fear and intimidation.  
We have a lot of work to do to correct the harm  
done in the last 5 years to our people, our freedoms, 
our economy, our institutions, and our spirit of  
togetherness. The [MASKED] is once again ready  
to take on this challenge and this responsibility.
 
We promise to repair the damage caused by  
a callous, divisive and deceitful [MASKED] Government.
 
We promise to put India back on the path of  
growth and development, not take her backwards.
 
We promise to empower every man,  
woman and child, not inﬂict distress.
We promise to provide leadership that brings  
people together, not one which divides.
We are a party that lives up to its promises, not  
one that deceives you with hollow jumlas at election 
time. With us, you will be sure of a bright future 
ﬁlled with hope for you and your children.
 
It is now time for you to make a choice.
 
With utmost humility, faith in our capacity to deliver, 
and unﬂinching courage to take on every challenge, 
we appeal to you to join hands with the [MASKED].  
Let us rebuild India. Together, let us get India  
moving again.
 
Remember:  
We have delivered before.  
We will deliver again!
53


Indian National [MASKED]


฀į฀Published by 
 
The All India [MASKED] Committee 
 
24, Akbar Road, New Delhi 
 
PIN: 110001
฀!฀Printed by 
 
Samrat Offset, B88 
 
Okhla Phase 2, New Delhi
 
PIN: 110020
 
Total Qty: 5000
฀ö฀www.[MASKED].in
฀`฀IndianNationalCongress
฀฀INCIndia
฀Ġ฀INCIndia
Ŋ฀IndianNationalCongress


